---
chapter-number: "01"
title: Discords Beyond the Itil
author: Sasha Sokolov
translator: Alexander Boguslawski
language: en
---

The moonth’s clear, no catchin up with the dates, the 
year’s current. To Citizen Sidor Fomich Pozhilykh, 
with all due respect, Ilya Petrikeich Zynzyrela’s *Discords Beyond the Itil*. With Your permission, I commence. Citizen Pozhilykh, I’m a man relatively peripheral to these places, 
but since I’m a sharpener, hence I sharpen knives-scissors, and 
it would be probably rather difficult to pull the wool over my 
eyes, even if at first glance I am a total gimp. I also happen to 
sharpen scythes, axes, and other hardwear, but such details 
would only obscure my account. That’s why I don’t recount the 
events of the years out-of-sight-and-out-of-mind, just lemme 
underscore that up ’til now I haven’t found myself in the slammer, despite dwellin in substantial towns. Wherever they’d settle me, I didn’t mind bein down and out, didn’t seriously hanker after a family, and made ends meet by askin folks for help in 
proportion to their means and possibilities. About that I remain remorseful, havin chosen for this purpose a co-op of invaliduals named after A. Sharpenhauer. I beg Your pardon, of 
course, but a dedicated work den and a bill of fare are available. 
When it’s warm, we do them knives all the time: We wander 
around and set out to find employment far away. In contrast, 
when it’s freezin, we service the populace in regard to sharpenin and flattenin ’cuz from November to April, every day 
without holidays, loners and monsters similar to this here correspondent of Yourses clink and circle on the mirror of the waters, and when the dusk descends, You welcome them in the 
three-story sickler, aptly named by a whim of some passerby a 
crashbaret; but Thou shall not find Ilya in their midst. You’ll 
turn blue: Why is he such a nincompoop, why doesn’t he procure for himself a pair of blades, like them other folks, is he 
disgusted by the prospect of scratchin what’s smooth with his 
sharps, is he snubbin a mugful of beneficially social brew? No 
way, I would never refuse what I’m used to and I’m not one of 
them sharpeners who ain’t sharp. To tell the truth, I don’t need 
a pair, but one attachable blade always hangs over the mantelpiece. It don’t matter, really, that I became, unfortunately, damaged, if by nature I am flintlike: I fell in love with glidin and 
can’t be held back, just as long as there’s somethin to push off 
with—ding once, Mister Pozhilykh, dong once, keep swayin, 
keep mutterin under the shaft bow even as far as the Valday 
harbor—castin of bells, bakin of pretzels, peddlin of hemp—
and no one can boss you around along the Itil. May I prolong? 
But what’s precisely happenin is that lately there ain’t nothin to 
push off with. On the fourth Thursday of December (read: on 
Christmas Eve), I was walkin from the other side of the river, 
steppin forth from one of them undertakers, probably unknown to You. We were sendin off a certain recluse who skated 
to his maker due to his haughty recklessness. He lived in 
Mylo—one could say—mukomolovo, but on the outskirts, in 
clusters of adder’s tongue with an admixture of willow; he was 
a hunter, perpetually kept postal cooers, altogether quite 
furry-legged, but I doubt that he conducted correspondence 
with anyone: It’s unlikely. However, he himself shuttlecocked 
crisp like lime bast in scorchin heat, and he was called—I don’t 
remember what. Gury—that’s what he was called, as long as 
we’re on it. Among the amusements of that particular Gury I’d 
reference the followin: He was the one that adored scrapin and 
rollin over the slick on his sharps, which additionally resulted 
in us losin a client, and the undertakers, in contrast, findin one. 
I’ll provide evidence right away. In the days of the Archer, to 
make it more dangerous, but more excitin, the loners of both 
Shallow Reach shores arrange races on the weakenin ice. It 
happens in the outer darkness, intentionally without heavenly 
lights, and the folks cut figures as well as they can and hurry-
scurry playin catch and chasin each other, without seein the 
holes and cracks. And that’s fraughtful. In matters of whirlin, 
everybody was always scorched by a certain Nikolay, a lad 
from, when everythin was said and done, the trash co-op. With 
the overly familiar nickname Helper, he played a sincere loser 
in this world, and some jokers among the envious ones meanly 
made fun of him, sayin that he shows off so fancifully only ’cuz 
he’s got a knack for lurkin around dark corners; so, they said, 
he’s used to it. What is the chronicle of his failures, if You don’t 
mind? He, first of all, tasted the familial pandemonium, but his 
spouse got together with a wolf slayer and chased the Helper 
away from the house, second of all. Then, he knocked on the 
Gorodnishche shelter for the unhearin, but they showed him 
the door and no more: Our department’s exclusively for the 
deaf, and you, as you can see, are also blind, so you understand 
yourself. For that reason the fellow shuffled to the sightless 
shelter: Fat chance, the limit of bunk spots has been exceeded; 
another thing if you had your own concertina, you’d hang 
around the embarcaderos and just put the proceeds into the 
common pot, and for that we would keep you. So Nikolay 
Helperov stood up in front of them in his entire shriveled 
height and, angrily cryin with his burnin walleyes, shouted: 
You overseas seedpods, if I had my own musick, would I ask 
you what to do, really? And at the next stage he turned up without warnin in the house of the transient homeless, and they 
stepped into his shoes politely, and splashed wholeheartedly. 
And they tempted: Live, brother, forever. And one day this 
dame has called on one of them; she notices the Helper in the 
midst of the other poor, in their circle: Who’s the one so unsightly over there among you at the rink? Not to worry; it’s just 
Nikolka here among us skatin at the rink. His circumstance is 
probably not too shabby, she says, if he’s spinnin so lively. No, 
they said, it’s not good, his circumstance sucks, the only joy he 
has left is to weave them figures. Then the dame: No, stop, you 
better don’t let him clown around, just look at him, how unappealin. So the almshouse’s tenants asked the Helper: Do us a 
favor, do not live, brother, forever, ’cuz there are reprimands. 
He did not answer nothin, as he had, besides everythin else, 
the reputation of a mute, and he set out far from the establishment and didn’t even look back. And the co-op of collectin all 
kinds of trash received him warmly. They reported he didn’t 
shine there with excessively long service, but durin a drunken 
incident got slightly upset and vanished somewhere, and it’s 
rather unlikely he’ll return. This is, if You don’t mind, this 
chronicle. One wonders: Did I sharpen his unsharpened ones? 
And it turns out only I and nobody else from the entire collective did his sharpenin, while the remainin co-workers, squeamish, turned up their noses, even though they themselves were 
pachoolies not of the first freshness. I also sharpened for Gury, 
and for Krylobyl, and for the Wintry Man I sharpened, for the 
entire Itil, You understand, I sharpened. And as to Gury the 
Hunter, he was makin a career in race-skatin. Every chance he 
gets, he wants nothin else, just let him fly over the slick. Sometimes he would fly into the co-op’s workshop, would fall, like a 
long-awaited rain durin the drought, would drop in, slightly 
tired, and what are we supposed to do?—we chip in a ruble 
each. And we start countin: Gury leaves the misty glade, from 
his pocket draws a blade; I will sharpen his blade fine, and 
you’ll have to get the wine. If I—with sadness, but I’m ready. 
Once I wanted to tether the skate to my boot, but at that moment I noticed it longed after a rasp. Drat—the rasp got completely lost or the colleagues snagged it. Gury graciously 
thought for a while and said: What are you lookin for, tell? 
I told him. He told them: Eh, you, mechanics, return the strument, whoever snagged it, ’cuz your mate has been palmin after 
it for a long time. But the co-op answered: Buzz off; what the 
heck do we need his freakin rasp for? And also: What, do you 
think he will dash on the rasp to Sloboda? And You will probably start doubtin too: Does it make sense, bein based in the 
proximity of the crashbaret, to run seven *verstas* to Sloboda 
on a wild-goose chase—either on the rasp or on the crasp? 
Don’t doubt, for, after all, the victim of the wager hurries not 
empty-handed; he is trundlin in a sack on his mighty hump 
glasswear collected in the dales and in the hills. And—perhaps 
You’re still completely out of the loop—I hasten to give You 
advance notice. In the crashbaret, due to some kind of false 
pride, they don’t accept them empties at all and trade for takeout with great scandals, by what, from the human point, they 
commit a commercial blunder. A very different picture can be 
seen in the joint at the tributary, beyond the ridge of curly, but 
at the first sight insignificant islands. Over there, what’s yours 
will be accepted at a fair price, without fuss, and the stuff you 
had paid for you have the right to use both inside and outside. 
And Gury to the grinders point-blank: Well, even on the rasp. 
And afterward, he again to them again: For Ilya it’s probably 
inconvenient to use the rasp, but I, obviously, could like a 
charm. Then and there they started eggin him on, Citizen 
Pozhilykh. We believe, we believe, among us you are a famous 
marathon whiz, you grew yourself such femurs—first quality, 
both thin and long; how can we stick our pitiful bonesies 
where they don’t belong, and Ilya the Malformed even more? I 
won’t hide it, there can be mug shots worse, but scarce. For 
instance, the game warden, Manul, who used to go after his fastidious needs to the Other Places, reported he had met there 
monstrosities even more atrocious. That means not everythin 
is lost, my dear, and as long as I manage somehow to hold the 
mallet and the whetstone, I will not count myself among the 
luckless, so don’t look for despair in Ilya. I’ve found the rasp, 
whisked away the burr, and come out, loaded, on the river. I am 
aimin slantily, at an angle, and since the ice is thin, the entire 
river is under me, like opened. I reach the tributary. On it, after 
acceleratin ’cuz it’s calm, I wheel up to Sloboda itself. I don’t 
drag out the tittle-tattle there too much, I’m in a hurry. I perform a lawful purchase-sale, turn around, and swing back, and 
the dusk keeps whirlin above my foolish bean, and my Sharpenhauers light for me from afar a storm lamp, so I won’t glide, 
against my will, by the workshops. We had a few then. You’ll 
outrun us, wretches, as if we were standin in place, the co-op 
egged on, racin with you, Gury, we’re passes. Yep, mechanics, 
yep, here, among you all, I am the only wiry runner. Just look, 
he told them, just look at all our hoar-frosted expanses, there’s 
no one I wouldn’t out-swoosh; where could such a lad be? We 
lit up, started chewin the fat, and went out to smoke in the 
cold. We stood on a hillock; behind us, a large wooden town—
there the fellas go on a wild bender—and lower, in front of us, 
a river’s reach, spread stock-still like on the palm of a hand. 
Look around, Gury informed the masters, there, on the righthand side, we have a settlement, Malokulebyakovo. And who 
lives down there? Who only doesn’t live in Kulebyakovo, the 
co-op’s workmen answered evasively. For instance, a wellknown miller-fatso happens to exist there, barely carried by the 
earth, not to mention the ice, and at the mill the miller’s got a 
Chink, Aladdin, but we understand it won’t be no honor for 
you to race with him. And one can also locate in Kulebyakovo 
a certain game warden who, as rumors have it, fell into a dry 
well. He’s screamin, but nobody can hear him, and his wife 
knows where he is, but ain’t interested in gettin him out ’cuz 
she’s doin hanky-panky with a neybor, also a game warden, but 
more younger; betcha he had messed her head up. In one word, 
the game wardens are busy, not into racin. And besides them 
there’s no one in the village. And in Ploski among more or less 
runners one can find the youngster Nikolay who never had his 
own name or, more precisely, had, but too long ago. And when 
that Nikolay the Helper went thru his transfiguration and flew 
away, this one snatched his name for himself—he did not allow, as they say, the goods to get wasted. And Gury again: And 
if he likes to snip some fish, it’s no problem at all, and no reason 
for the fishermen to take offense and wish his demise. Just 
think—a man steals a few fishes from people and they have 
found themselves a reason to chew him out. True, Gury, true, 
the livin creatures—whether free or in snares—they’re clearly 
nobody’s, and if somebody’s after all, then we know Whose, 
but in that case all the trappers here, it appears, are the most 
greatest poachers in front of Him. And in vain, in vain they 
bumped Nikola off one day. Here he is, by the way, takin their 
catch from their under-the-ice traps beyond the islands. He 
tied his sack, put it on his sled, and started pullin. He’s shiverin, 
the blizzard has blasted his longsighted orbs, his *valenki* are 
worn out, he lost his mittens, his skates ain’t sharpened, and 
the annoyin Wolfox shows right up. Throw me a fishie, he 
threatens Nikolay, throw me another, otherwise I’ll send darkness on the Itil. Night scares Nikolay from Ploski more than 
death, so he unconditionally throws into the woods a triple of 
sturgeons for the Wolfox. ’Cuz, after all, if he won’t make it to 
Gorodnishche before dark, he won’t get the funds for the 
stuff; if he won’t get the funds for the stuff, he won’t drop in to 
the crashbaret; if he won’t drop in to the crashbaret, he won’t 
have fun with them comrades; and not to have fun with them 
comrades, then, really, why donkey work like that, Citizen 
Pozhilykh, You be the judge. And while these activists are 
waitin for Nikolay with heavy clubs at the edge of the village, 
he approaches the suburbs with half a sack of silvery sturgeons 
and green slimy tenches. He declares: I salute you, the most 
merriest town of bast, hail to you, tall painted cockroach 
towers. Oh, my dear town, he says, give shelter for the upcomin 
night to the unlucky fisherman killed by foes, buy his goods, 
give him some monies to jingle in his pocket; may the old 
man’s wrinkles become smooth; may the lonely bat spread his 
folded wings. And don’t be a cheapskate; pour me, town, to the 
rim. And also, he says, introduce me, town, to some lonesome 
babe with high cheekbones and a tender heart. So he took off 
his skates and started walkin, walkin up the hill, that Nikolay 
from Ploski, and a hellish host of have-nots hurries to meet 
him, without haste: Give us and give us, they go, some of your 
catches for Christ’s sake, otherwise it’ll be even worse. Esteemed 
beggars, the splashers in my sack ain’t mine, ’cuz everythin 
around us here, includin the spindles of speckled clouds, and 
the river, and the boats that like big-bellied widows lie strewn, 
abandoned, with their stomachs up, around the bathhouses, as 
well as our rags and we ourselves who are wearin them—all 
this is not mine and not yours. We know, we know, nodded the 
paupers, laughin like possessed, in that case give us, nevertheless, a tail per soul; give us, furthermore, fishes that ain’t yours. 
I see, Nikolay wails to the hapless ones on the hill, I see that it’ll 
be, I reckon, rather hard to take you for a ride. And he hands 
each one a tench. Where could he go—the poor are legion and 
he’s alone. A lonely man on the road, especially when such a 
blue haze hangs over the Volga, he, allow me to note, is alone in 
the entire world. Nikolay gives each one a tail and enters the 
wooden December town with the rest of his booty, and knocks 
with his ancient walkin stick on the gates of resonatin courtyards, and curses snarly mongrels bitin the frozen chains. And 
we’re still standin on the riverbank; so far not many stars are 
shinin above us, but still. And Gury the Hunter, he announces 
without beatin around the bushes: To run races with Nikolay 
from Ploski, even if I do respect him a little, I don’t consider 
decent; in my opinion, he’s both decrepit and vain—I’ll outscrape him and embarrass.


But ain’t clickin, somebody suddenly said, ain’t smartin over 
there, in Ploski, that Fyodor, on the abacus of his? That is, not 
necessarily Fyodor but sorta Pyotr. And, in general—Yegor. 
His occupation was listed as an accounter, but even he, as it 
was revealed afterward, was a first-rate thief: That’s with whom 
Gury should have done his racin. Do You understand what 
happened? Well, when that dame appeared without warnin on 
the spit, they—mostly the local sitters out of the game 
wardens—sat there and observed the flight of geese, like almost always, but about this sittin very few outsiders have any 
idea ’cuz what’s happenin takes place in the bushes and in twilights and is hidden from those sailin on the water, and when 
they sit on the spit and have a few, this dame comes to them, 
inquirin: Say, is there among you the one I’m searchin for? 
Well, how should we put it, they shrug their shoulders, look for 
yourself, we only beg you to notice that we’re all first-class and 
ready for everythin and anythin just to please you, the gatecharmer of our places. She started lookin for herself and later 
announced: I don’t see among you the one I’m searchin for, 
but I’m noticin another one who would do for now. And she’s 
lookin at Pyotr. Cruel shivers seized the accounter, the bookkeeper flared up as if a bright flame went blazin through his 
veins. And he made an announcement, gettin up and shakin off 
hurrily-scurrily. He made an announcement, gettin up from 
the damp earth, where he was to transfer in the mere future: 
I am Yegor from Ploski; lead me wherever you wish. The dame 
led him, the happy one, wherever she wished, and the sitters 
drank, chewed their chasers, and were jealous of Pyotr. After a 
few days he returned to the spit, and they surrounded him and 
kept askin: So, Petra, did you happen to have a sweet stroll? 
The sitters kept askin Fyodor, to learn if he had a sweet time 
with the dame. And he conveyed almost nothin to them, but 
said this: It was so that better don’t even ask. Well, but still—
the wolfmen did not back off—but still, was your visit with her 
sweeter than a home brew? Don’t ask, answered Pyotr, not 
even by hintin. Was the past sweeter than krambambuli for 
you, they asked nevertheless. What krambambuli, Fyodor, enraged, surprised them, everythin went sweeter than Valday rotgut. So they had a few then to Pyotr’s return, and he off the cuff 
admits with tears that he’s not considerin returnin to his heartthrob; the past is canceled, and that’s why he don’t need nothin, 
for what could he personally need after all that happened between the two of them; moreover, recollections don’t promise 
forgettin; memory, brother, don’t go on debit but on credit. 
And that’s a fact; as far as this is concerned, my dear Pozhilykh, 
You can depend on me, the one who once suffered a crash at a 
high speed. It did not work out for you, Ilya Zynzyrella, you 
got deformed, warped like a sheet of plywood. We muddled by 
in the countryside, we huddled in a happy-go-lucky marriage 
in Orina’s burrow, havin forgotten about problems and permits. I won’t swear that our relationship rolled on smoothly, 
but do stress—in the beginnin it was bearable. It became unbearable, when from the switch, where she used to sort couriers, expresses, and alike, and where due to the shortage of free 
time hanky-panky was not really goin thru, they transferred my 
queen to the brick tower and made her a dispecher—to release 
train cars from the sortin hill. It won’t do you any good that 
you, Ilya, purred, anticipatin her bonus for cleanliness, you 
sang “Joy,” she lives, you kept sayin, in a tall tower, you whistled, not expectin major changes. Only afterward you latched 
on that, hounded by the ramjunctious boredom, she hitched 
herself to couplers, ran into the maintenance boors, and that if 
someone was not allowed into the tall tower—it was none else 
but you, my dear. And, havin latched on, at first you still joked: 
Orya, stop gettin filthy with them in unmown ditches, it’s 
kinda not right; after all, they’re just not good, this railroad 
brood. That’s how you joked, findin inside smidgens of 
strength, even if every so often you could bear it no longer. 
Plump, curvaceous, brushin her hair with the hair pick at dawn, 
she kept givin me runarounds: How do you know if good or 
not? Meanwhile, I was lyin on my cot and emittin fumes, not 
willin to get up—what for, I don’t have to hurry nowhere no 
more. She kept givin me runarounds, and there was no place to 
put a proof of purity on her, and the hair pick—once I looked 
more carefully—was not the one I presented to her on Ascension. I skinflinted, humbled myself in distant domiciles to 
purchase it, denied myself the necessities through the entire 
leaf-slayer, and then—when I looked more carefully—a 
different one. I started wondrin. Our attraction turned into 
dust; I should take off—with no sack, no bag, and no footwear. 
But I am not awfully mighty, I get attached; instead, I kept diggin, persuadin. What kind of a special hair pick, Oryushka, 
have you got? A hair pick like any other, she says thru her teeth, 
clutchin pins-hairpins in them. Hmm, and mine, the one I gave 
you, you’re still takin care of it, ain’t you? You bet, you bet, I 
took it to a museum; she shrewdly reins me in with her tongue. 
On the rails, she stretches the truth, I lost that hair pick, and 
that’s all there’s to it. I was cowerin like a panic-stricken animal 
durin the hunt, I kept proddin, fallin into doubts: Hmm, and 
this one, in that case, by what ruse did you get it, did someone 
give it to you? And the dawn, I note in passin, is breakin in the 
window and in the mirror, turnin into a first-class iridescent 
azure, and Orina’s downrite bathin there, supplethal, she’s 
splashin, exactly like in our promised pond in devil knows 
which summer, roughly in the month of July. Those days we 
haven’t yet shared affections, she kept deceivin, postponin—
later and later—and I kept waitin and bearin it, encouraged. 
And two empty cable reels floated there, swellin, like at many 
other reservoirs. She’s thrown off all her fabrics on the bush of 
stag-head and steps out on the edge—shameless. Well, and 
then I got plugged up with the shoe cord; the threaded tape 
tightened like a noose. There’s no way to break it, I was dealt a 
stubborn specimen. In short, I undid that knot with my teeth: 
They were still present. And Orina was standin in her cheap 
pearls only, but she herself was priceless, just try to find another one like that. I did not count how many others I happened to have before her, but up to my mutilation I did not 
enjoy casual joys aplenty. And those joys, really—should you 
laugh or cry? They all make faces, all fuss around, they tease—
I’ll give or I won’t give, afraid to be too cheap, as if I, a braggart 
fool, really could offer them, fancy-schmancies, anythin in exchange. And the main thing, when you finally calm them 
down, even then everythin somehow turns out topsy-turvy, 
crumpled, not complete, and quite often without real comforts. 
And as far as allowin themselves to give it up—never, not for 
the world: They stand on ceremony. In Orina’s case—I suddenly saw her in all her simplicity, and fell in enrapture, of 
course. I could not bear it and I let her understand, by singin a 
stanza from one wonderful aria. You do look pretty, say, in any 
dress, but when you’re naked you look best. It would have been 
better, however, if I had been less of a songbird in love, and 
more looked ahead; perhaps I would have noticed besides the 
real knot on the shoe cord the comin knot of a slightly different 
kind—where the freight trains are sorted, that is the choochoo switch with various semafors and clever whatchamacallits like greasers’ hooks and the greasers in person, deftly wormin themselves in without soap where they shouldn’t. The first 
knot—thanks to the flashes of summer lightnin—I managed 
to untie, but the sortin one—even if all the nights there are full 
of fire—brought out of the blue a muddle unfatomable to any 
mind. But right now, I repeat, Orina stood there white and 
shiny, like a saber in the moonlight. To be honest, all in all it 
was bearable, but I remember for me personally it was unbearable; I wanted to learn as soon as possible what she was doin, 
and with whom, and when, that is to worm out all her ins and 
outs. It’s not enough for you, lecherous Ilya, just to dupe and 
force the woman, no, you, like an irrepressible spider, suck out 
of her drop after drop the tincture of confessions, drawin from 
it the strength of pity, in order to approach and force her again. 
And Orina stood for a while on the edge of the pond and 
stepped in, and I, havin disrobed, took a dive. I dived deeply, 
with opened eyelids; I stared—the liquid glaze. The eye of the 
world was this pond with reels; a polished opal in the settin of 
bluish clay, clumps of willows and long slimy weeds it was. 
And where are our crucians?—suddenly came to my mind. 
I screwed up my eyes—they kept nappin in their holes, shaded 
by the banks, under the snags. And the snails, that is the mussels? I love them. Knockin around the world on account of my 
services with the lonely acordeon of mine or with a grindin 
foot-operated stand, wandrin in the dale of the beloved river 
Itil, worn out and not fond of myself, I ate countless numbers 
of the latter. Do they taste good? You see, I won’t spare praises: 
Yummy. In the unheard-of area that shelters the ancientest 
tribe of the deaf, for whom your entire filharmonic is useless, 
or in a dull district, where nobody cuts, slices, or chops anythin 
out of rampant laziness; in the unheard-of district or in the dull 
area oblivious to the runnin out of the uselessly wasted light, 
when you played for the residents and they did not pay attention, or when you implored if they wanted to have this or that 
sharpened in order to get from them just enough to keep the 
pot boilin, but they did not bring out even the tiniest needle, 
you should find out from the old water yoke the way to the 
river and scamper, empty-bellied, to pay her a visit, as if you 
were goin to your mother-in-law for a formal borscht. Limp 
along the high roads on the only existin leg, hobble through 
water meadows, shaded by sparklin precious coverlet. What’s 
that, what seems to have twinkled there so dimly, like that 
quiverin rot at the Bydogoshch cemetery? What flickered like 
silver in the pea shrubs, sorta resemblin a shimmer of your rugged aluminum mug in the rips of your never-mended bag? 
What glimmered there with the cold light of the flash, as if 
from under the fold of a merchant’s coat at the market, the vessel from Crystal Goose with the priceless blue hooch sparked 
straight in your dried-out eyes? What is flutterin there like a 
sarafan’s ruche, what is flappin there like mother-in-law’s 
tongue? What and what—such an annoyin whatter, you’re 
nothin but trouble. My buddy, this is the Wolf River, your kin. 
You tell her: Halloo, my sister, I’m in distress, quench my thirst 
with your current, feed the tramp with your mussels, gimme as 
many of them as you can, I enjoy their taste. Provide just them 
’cuz salt and matches I always have on me; and, obviously, lay 
me down to sleep along the current of yours, place the softest 
stone under my nape. And she says: Upon examination, Ilyusha from Gorodnishchi, I don’t begrudge you nothin; for instance, water—drink ’til you burst; and the same situation 
with the mussels—chomp and don’t count. And the stone—if 
you want, I’ll give it to you to put under your head or, if you 
want, on your neck, and then keep restin to your health even to 
the Lastest Judgment.
