---
chapter-number: "02"
title: The Trapper's Tale
language: en
---

To live; to know the value of deep galoshes at the time 
of flooding of the deep and shallow rivers. To be; to 
soil the dark-green leaf. To live, to be, and to see how 
in ditches the waybread wilts. To live and to be—in step with 
the meandering of winter, may the hue of its micalike scaly 
wings change. To live and to be—may they iridesce like mother-of-pearl: any icicle, any membrane. May Maria trumpet on a 
shepherd’s horn at the railroad, and may the latter hurry northward fifteen minutes of slow walk toward the sunset. A walk 
along the alley, positioned perpendicularly to the ramp—to 
the sunrise. And on the southerizon, above the city, as a result 
of sizable smoldering installations that mangle the skyline, may 
there always be a selection of barbecued and smoked clouds. 
To draw the distant silhouettes of the post office employees—letter carriers, gripped by anguish and the leaf fall. May your 
people wander around your park, and may your inclement 
weathers come, chilling them to the bone and causing the folds 
of their consignment-store coats to flap. May Maria work in the 
tall brick tower at the very edge of the station. May she work and 
may the voice of her horn, smudged by the watercolor wind, 
smudged like a star of someone nearsighted without glasses, 
command the fussy scurrying of the couplers, anxieties of the 
signalwomen, and the mood of the rail guardsmen. At first 
they were gold-toothed couplers, but later, when she was 
named the head of the tower, they were gradually replaced by 
stately engineers. May the long-distance veteran come, complaining in half whisper, with a lisp, about the shattered tender, 
shaky shafts, and the expanses of its long-distancedness. May 
the trees, donning the tattered tailcoats of the dusk, swing, 
wave their hands like the conductors, scarecrows, and windmen-millers. The blizzard, still confused by many with the lizard, which, even with a “b” it so resembled, although a special 
decree not only had determined long before their differences, 
but also assigned the not appropriate and not needed by the 
lizard “z” to the blizzard—the blizzard kept gathering speed, 
kept acting out, becoming relentless and merciless. In the barracks people were having fun. Ah, how my head is spinning, 
sang in rooms a reprehensibly empty-headed chansonnette, 
and her round photos, glued to the records, spun around, stuck 
on gramophone figs. To draw from memory the bottom of the 
ravine, overgrown with ferns, and the dam holding the reservoir of drinking waters; to draw the entire reservoir, crammed 
with the props of all possible regattas in the season of watermelons and drizzling precipitations, shaped like little circles 
and sticks, and the sailor-reader, who, at the whim of the artist, 
may sit on the stone slope of the dam, having raised up the 
collar of his pea jacket, smoke his pipe, and read a navy-colored 
book—about the sea. Have a drink and a chaser. And she herself drank and had a chaser. They called her Maria. The engineer 
drank, had a chaser, called her Marina, and chewed over the 
same rail and road gloom, treading water from Orekhovo to 
Zuevo. The bearings kept cracking, the axle boxes kept heating 
up, the manometer readings were announced, and before every bridge, before every tunnel, unfailingly, the damper was 
closed and the siphon was opened. To draw a passenger station: a dilapidated pavilion with a cone-shaped false turret and 
a beer stand with a stream of dark coats and green hats; to draw 
the remnants of a monastery wall, the viaduct with a section of 
the highway, and the pond at the foot of a high embankment. 
At the neighbors’ raved an Italian concertina, and a habanera, a 
polka, or a quadrille pounded the crumbling joists. May the 
hubbub steamily tumble out through the opened window 
vents and as pastel-hued rags—washed-out and full of holes—may it hang on clotheslines and after a while, blown off by the 
wind, disperse over the park as flocks of jackdaws and crows, 
alight on the branches, swarm, ethereal and aloof, and later, 
with the husks of silence, with its clots, fall down on the alleys. 
May the gusts of the ground wind brush its remnants into the 
ravine, into the dark blue haze of the river torrent. I love you, 
my old park, confessed the artist, flipped upside down, completely worn out and listless, under the stairs, in the truncated 
storeroom of the carton master who, in his spare time, collected candy wrappers. To draw the heavy, nebulous, slovenly 
face of Maria and frequently, instead of the expected portrait, 
may the inexperienced draftsman create the image of her mask, 
as it were; and the mask wanted to wake up, to come to life, but 
its tormenting lethargic debility turned out to be stronger than 
its feeble wishes—it did not wake up. But he saw, he saw—on 
her meaty lips and droopy-lead lids flickered the flashes of 
mystery. It will be revealed after midnight, when through sleep 
you will hear how, outside, the rain engineer will start raving in 
a whisper and the entire earth, Masha, drunk, poisoned by the 
tincture of autumn, will dolorously submit to him, accepting 
his pushy minuscule seed. Later, may her anthropomorphous 
shadow wander across the wall, searching for the rattler of 
matches and for engineer’s cigarettes. Kazbek or Kazbich? In 
any case, even if he had a herd of a thousand mares, he would 
have given it all away for one Azamat. But if the girl who went 
out with that ship’s boy to that meadow, where the sailors take 
their merry girlfriends to play on swings, if she agreed to go 
there also with you, she would probably fly and squeal in a high 
voice with you too. You stood in the darkness of the forest, unseen. It was neither evening nor day, and at the reservoir the 
sails were still present and the trainers on motorboats kept 
croaking commands for rowers into bullhorns. She squealed 
like lapwings in the field, when you walk across in semidarkness, having set the traps for foxes and cherishing in advance 
the real rifle, promised by the engineer. Or when the ship’s boy 
has led her by hand to the abandoned slips, and the lapwings 
have been flying about, and the slips are filthy, and the rain and 
time cannot catch up with washing them off, and now and then 
a dead rat, a stiff toad, or a lifeless shrike. May Maria howl, running out on the dam, calling “Come home,” while the light-carrier wind—may it blow in the darkness and extinguish for 
good the windows of the barracks, eye after eye, one after another. May the waves get bolder. The other ship’s boy, a veritable chimney from the early youthful years, groaning with the 
saddle like an old man, buzzing with the dynamo and flashing 
with the headlamp, may cough by on two wheels in the direction of the expiration of the furlough. Maria was sewing. What 
was Masha sewing? Masha was mending the engineer’s coat. 
The engineer was happy. He sat on the couch and read the train 
schedule. Or the timetable. The blizzard was approaching. In 
the thickets of tubular fragile plants, with the open fractures 
smelling like the first frosts, in the thickets next to the muddy 
stream, croakers prophesied the universal flood. There, in the 
ravine, once—*her* notebook: a half-washed-out name. It contained sufferings in the Russian language. In particular, it reported that Papa bought skates for Nikolay, that a squirrel 
gnaws nuts, that granddaughter is young and grandmother 
vice versa, that sister is playing piano and brother bala—but 
instead of balalaika, to the middle of the notebook stretched a 
solid, uninterrupted balabala, a bolero of the pimply barrack 
life, overheard and written down by the true love of the youngster with an anemic forehead of an artist neither called nor recognized who, years later, answering the reproaches of a special 
commission that up until now he has not presented to its attention a reasonable account of the hunting roundup, more precisely, of the circumstances accompanying the return of the 
hunters from the roundup, being, in essence, the necessary attributes of the return—since are the circumstances not determining and stipulating the entire development and appearance 
of the phenomenon, is it not alive thanks to them, and what is 
the phenomenon without accompanying circumstances—
answering the reproaches of the commission, he may reply: 
I do not perceive sufficient reasons, for the sake of which my 
impressions about such trivialities would be able to substantially help in the inspection’s work; therefore I would truly prefer to keep them exclusively to myself. However, if You so 
insist—please. We are returning at dusk. You, I suppose, are 
already acquainted with each other or, more precisely, with 
this wonderful time of the day and are irrevocably enchanted 
by it, like I am, and thus reveal remarkable taste, exceptional 
feel for the color, and an inclination for melancholic contemplation. There are, as a rule, several of us—huntsmen and up to 
a dozen dogs in the pack. It is December. In order not to attract 
the gawkers and not to lower the quality of the picture by my 
awkward, still-city-like gait, I am trying to stay at the end of the 
procession; therefore, I see neither the faces nor the muzzles; 
only someone’s profile flashes momentarily. Gray hats of the 
hunters—You are probably familiar with this heavy and firm but 
also fuzzy felt of our provincial factories, to which snow sticks 
in lumps with such a remarkable tenacity, whether it falls on 
the headgear or the headgear falls into a snowdrift—the gray 
hats of the hunters are pulled low, over their ears, as the saying 
goes, and that is why one can not see their napes, either. One of 
us, in addition to the usual equipment—a dagger, a game bag, 
and a spear—is burdened by our shared trophy: The fox had 
been slain already at dawn. By the way, take a good look at our 
mongrels and abortzois. Horrendously long, ugly, curved monkey-like and resembling Filippov pretzels, do their tails leave at 
least a flicker of hope for pure blood? It is no secret—pitiful is 
the exterior of my hounds: skin and bones, and completely 
matted coats. By the way, there is among them one bloated, 
wobbly, with a hideously short snout—a spook matching the 
piglet that some simple folk roast over the bonfire in front of 
the tavern entrance, where, having assured us they would catch 
up soon, some huntsmen dropped in to wait out a very strong 
gust of headwind. Is there any need to mention that right now 
we are on the summit of a large hill, condemned, like the entire 
site, to the fresh Christmas snow, and our figures contrast quite 
well with this background? After leaving the tavern on the left, 
we have almost passed it and begin to descend into the valley. 
In front of us stretches a perennially familiar panorama. This is 
the dale of the river, and a town in this dale next to this river, 
and ponds, and barns in the distance, and the sky above everything listed. This is our country; we live here, and while some 
of us live in town, the others live in the village, beyond the emerald river. We easily distinguish the dike and the mill, the 
church and the horse carts on the roads, the library, the hospice, and the bathhouse. We see the steep roof of the invalids’ 
home, the grinding establishment, the shelter for the deaf, and 
the market. And a mass of skaters on the ice of the river and the 
ponds. Their voices and skates sound resonant, their faces are 
flushed. Here—brownish clumps of leafless trees, resembling 
the fur of unknown animals; there—washerwomen, rinsing the 
linen in an ice hole. In addition, boats frozen into ice, and levees, 
and birds—oh, a mass of birds both on the branches and simply 
in the celery-smelling space—firebirds, faded, discolored, or 
having completely replaced their whimsical garb with the modest feathers of magpies and crows. What a marvelous country, 
out of this world, a visitor halts in admiration. The simplicity 
and modesty of the walnut frame only enhances the enchanting 
beauty of the landscape and the excellence of the color glazing. 
Of course, our sketch does not pretend to describe and evaluate all the other pictures exhibited at the vernissage: We will 
only stop for a moment next to some of them. *Self-Portrait in 
Uniform*. The canvas is to such a degree distinctive that one 
simply has to be amazed. It has been said that having finished 
the work, its author was literally shaken by the depth of his 
self-perception; success caught the artist completely unawares. 
Having unsociably locked himself in his atelier, located at that 
time in the orangery, he, after getting somnambulistically lost 
among photinias with tiny blooms and mannequins indifferent to everything, and repeating ceaselessly “I do not believe it, 
I do not believe it,” stubbornly refuses to believe that it is not 
him there, in the corner, leaning over the easel, but only his 
image, even if it is extraordinarily similar to the original. And 
when his relatives, assisted by the gardener and the cutter, having broken the door, finally convinced the master in his own 
originality—he burst into tears. The color reproduction of 
*Self-Portrait in Uniform* will adorn the frontispiece of our 
monograph about this remarkable man; its publication is eagerly anticipated day in and day out. And how significant is the 
fact that the appearance of one of the subtlest, most refined 
realists of the recent past coincided with such a remarkable 
date as the five-hundredth anniversary of the pin. The artist 
himself thought that the mentioned coincidence was far from 
accidental and emphasized this on every appropriate occasion, 
seeing in it either the gesture of Providence or the digit of Mnemosyne. Say, in one of his poems, the painter, with his characteristic candor, announces: Well, gentlemen, in the year from 
the invention of the pin 541, on the last Friday of November, 
approximately at six o’clock, at a considerable distance from 
any capitals, in the middle of Russia, and at the same time on 
the shore of a deep and wide river, someone is drunkenly beating the tambourine. The dusk has already forced the eyes to 
open wide, obscured the vistas, and abolished all traces of 
light. The silhouette of the musician is about to dissolve. For 
that reason, groaning and tripping over the folds of the Amztarakhan robe that gives an impression of being completely 
frayed, suffering from the chill emanating from the mossy 
stones of the cellar, shuddering from disgust at the sight of 
multiple millipedes, and begging the hiccups to move over to 
the submissive passion-bearers Fedot and Yakov, let us roll out 
into God’s world the barrel of the narrative—and let us finally 
knock out the bung. That is how, gazing through a small window during a relatively late hour of one of the pitiful days of 
another inclement year and trying to gather his thoughts, the 
hero of this story philosophized. *Vita sine libertate nihil*, he philosophized, *vivere est militare*. He was not fresh and not young.