---
chapter-number: "03"
title: Notes of a Binging Hunter
author: Sasha Sokolov
translator: Alexander Boguslawski
language: en
---

## Note I

### Impression

- Look around! Countless insects are flying
- And still follow honey trails as before,
- But too many subtle signs are implying
- That the summer won’t be back anymore.

- Not by chance, on mornings of amber,
- More translucent than the skin of the moon,
- Gypsy moth, after hot-weather slumber,
- Flies to find a new wife very soon.

- At the market—hurly-burly, slashed prices.
- Bergamot pears? We have them. So sweet!
- And if you are a bird, a few slices
- Of potato beetle’s larvae you’ll eat.

- Childhood is sadness itself. There, in the wastes,
- Grandkids search for grandpa’s tobacco,
- Cabbage whites and field browns they chase
- And they sing an old dance tune from Cracow:

- When, alas, our grandma will die,
- We will lay her to rest, dust to dust,
- So she’ll turn into a white butterfly
- When a hundred or a thousand years pass.

- Nothing’s changed in the yard’s verdant thicket,
- Only asters, not poppies, bloom now.
- More haphazard are the chirps of the cricket.
- And the hammock? No one’s weighing it down.

- Shrubs and bushes give us an impression
- That they flaunt the hue of their bugs,
- While a cohort of young craftsmen in session
- Red Cahors in the cooper’s yard chugs.

## Note II

### Preparation of Cartridges

- 1
- I strolled the other day
- In the forest of pine.
- The sand of its trails,
- Its needle and its leaf,
- Including arrowleaf—
- Everything was dry.
- And I was mad that I
- Was foolish to put on
- These wetwalkers of mine
- And don a slicker too.

- So now, more mindful, I,
- Getting ready to go,
- Retired both the waders and the raincoat.
- Then sunshine rain caught me on my way—
- I ran and tried to hide;
- When I came home, I shook all over.

- My lonesome babe kept scolding: Serves you right,
- I warned you—legs are throbbing—but you
- Preferred to listen to the wagging dog’s tail—
- You banned the coat, discarded the gummies.
- Oh, daydreamer, she went on, oh, hothead.

- 2
- You have a magic box!
- In it you keep all things
- Needed for hunting with a rifle.
- So with no further words
- Open it; from inside
- Take out some carton tubes,
- And also a few caps
- Invented by the late Monsieur Gévelot.
- And in these carton tubes
- Thrust these Gévelot caps
- And sprinkle powder there.
- Go, fellow!

- Using a thick sack cut into small lots,
- Or worn felt boots, or flannel pajamas,
- Insert a plug; follow with some shot;
- And then another plug securely jam in.

- Sir French is sitting headless on a chair.
- My dear field marshal, it seems you’re not well.
- The gentleman became slightly wrinkled.
- Who dared to do this? Maybe Jomini
- Swung his sharp saber from beyond La Manche?

- Sir French is sitting stately on the chair,
- The sizes of the shot are six and five,
- But since the barrel is caliber twenty,
- The shells’ caliber is also twenty-two.

- My powder’s smoky like grandpa’s tobacco,
- And flashes of old age astonished my forehead,
- The clock tick-tocks, imagining one thing,
- Imagining the other, imagining something.

- My lonesome babe’s asleep, chock-full of kissel.
- Well, may she dream of my love for her.

- And I—of hunting.

## Note III

### The Time Between

- The time between wolf and hound
- Is good for a chat soul to soul.
- Though the lunch isn’t lavish at all,
- You’ll be able to talk round and round
- With both, the wolf and the hound.

- It’s good that near the pond,
- Sitting on a branch of oak tree,
- The Hoopoe pipes with great glee
- And repeats on and on:
- How good I feel by the pond.

- A handcar mournfully brays
- From the *versta* thirty-and-four.
- The vistas can’t be bare any more.
- The store is closed for a day.
- Boredom. The handcar still brays.

- A jug dripped a drop on the plate,
- The cricket knows its place well.
- But really, can anyone tell
- Whether it’s early or late?
- It dripped again on the plate.

- You’ll be able to talk round and round,
- Of course, if the topic is right.
- If it’s not, have a good night:
- Evening drags, as if spellbound,
- After the wolf and the hound.

## Note IV

### The Grinder

#### (A Conversation with a Critic)

- Don’t sleep on the ground—you’ll get weary,
- You’ll be barely moving at all!
- Scat, my carper, stop nagging, you’re dreary!
- I am dreaming that a valiant flag-bearer
- Gave me weapons that used to be fairer,
- And they need to be sharpened—they’re dull.

- Do I love such weather, so pleasing,
- When the clouds are suddenly gone,
- And the masses can notice much easier
- The appearance, let’s not say: of a cuckoo,
- But correctly, let’s say: of the Hoopoe
- Who is cranking his grinding flint stone?

- You bet. But what, one may ponder,
- The sound of the Hoopoe’s loud grind
- Resembles at this moment of wonder?
- It sounds like someone is crunching
- The old chicken bone you were munching,
- But then left it, unfinished, behind.

- Enlightenment’s reins briefly dropping,
- In a turban and caftan, *hakeem*,
- The folk *akyn*, all in motion,
- Across a steep gully is hopping,
- Comparing, full of emotions,
- The grinding to the sound of a stream.

- What a dank, clammy autumn! It’s taxing.
- But the Hoopoe is bothered not
- By the fact he doesn’t have access
- To dull scythes, or sickles, or axes,
- But because nobody asks him:
- Please, put on my scarf and my coat.

- At the moment, the grinder figure,
- A dullard, a dolt, round the bend,
- Upset that he’s not a gravedigger,
- A builder, a tinker, a baker,
- A light carrier or a toy maker,
- Sings something about motherland.

- That’s life: By the invalids’ home,
- Which, in winter, has a rink at its gate,
- The Hoopoe approaches the lame,
- Or rather, one-legged gnome,
- Blind and mute, hunchbacked, and tame,
- And keeps honing his lone figure skate.

- Just look—and pass by, heed this lesson:
- Someone’s grief is not a true grief.
- Even more, ’cause no one can lessen
- Pains of those whom fate so distresses
- That the scorching sun can’t impress them,
- Hence, no deluge can bring them relief.

- Darkness falls. Irked by fate’s treason,
- Like a hungry Gorgon would do,
- The leaf fall’s whispering season
- Stalks the verb-herd servile and sleazy,
- But—sees no rhyme and no reason,
- And the actual herd—is gone too.

## Note V

### October

- Is it really October? Such a balmy air
- That if not for the rustling of leaf fall,
- One could simply forget about everything
- And for hours stare into farnowheres.
- And smell sagebrush.

- But one has to live, to act, to go on,
- Worry about the presence of kindling,
- One has to sew new squirrel slip-ons,
- Stockpile mushrooms and go hunting.

- Inasmuch as winter is certain.

- Carelessly showing the white of face,
- Here I am; I’d like to listen to the Hoopoe.
- Go on, rattle, cuckoo, my dear hooting whoop,
- Tiny toy, trifle, trinket, true treasure.

- Who knows where and for what reason
- Someone with a drum roams the copses;
- Spindlewort, fusoria, fusanum,
- Scarletberry, snakeberry, solanum.
- With a glow of roll-ups,
- Fragments of vulgar phrases,
- A part of speech known by the name of cough,
- And with the moaning of rowlocks
- Resembling the mallard’s call,
- Approaches a gaggle of ragged freeshooters.
- It’s beginning.

## Note VI

### Pas d’Espaigne

#### (Recollection of the City)

- Mozart’s music was merrily sounding
- One day in the old city park,
- A lady was blissfully longing,
- But for whom, she was still in the dark.
- Among the musicians, excited,
- A visiting cornet spun around,
- And for tête-à-tête he invited
- The lady to a quaint *restaurant*.
- *Pas d’Espaigne* is a wonderful dance,
- Because it’s so easy to learn:
- Two steps back, then two to advance,
- Turn around, and repeat all again.
- In the evening, when all dancers vanished,
- He became her friend and her crush.
- He appeared to her to be Spanish,
- And, all of a sudden, she blushed.
- Next day, at the quay, she was musing:
- Should she ask for a farewell encore?
- In the old city park Mozart’s music
- From that morning sounded no more.

## Note VII

### Postal Chores in the Month of November

- The leaves and the birds—they all went flying.
- The first—off trees, the other—southbound.
- Soon, on warm mittens we’ll be relying
- So our hands can be safe and sound.

- Yet ere the frosts and blizzards commence,
- To orphan winter prelude in light gray,
- Nigh is the time of Saint Vitus’s dance,
- Devoted brother of the bag and jail.

- In this connection, letters—piles of them,
- And telegrams—ready for this day,
- Have to be sent. Just two words: I am.
- To all addresses. And without delay.

- Have to be sent, while telegraph wires
- Can still be seen and we’re still not late.
- I am—before people light their fires,
- Before the cities finally lock their gates.

- Have to be sent. Where’s the ink for my *stilo*?
- Perhaps the twilight sucked it up dry?
- I am! And to the Chinese, to Manila:
- *Bin ich*?—asking for their advice—Am I?

- Have to be sent, with a short note—urgent,
- By a swift gryphon or by the pale mare,
- Or, using the term of the postal agent,
- Pounded like cutlets, leaving none to spare.

- That’s what I chose and, whacked by asthma,
- Went to the cellar, for a swig down there.
- And when I crawled out, pleasantly plastered,
- A *vespertilio* flashed in the air.

## Note VIII

### Insomnia

- There’s no sleep in either eye
- (The chemist’s right, alas—years fly),
- But who would need it anyway,
- With a velveteen ribbon around its crown,
- And with a bit of a tilt?
- At the first sight—just a sieve.

- I see it all as if it were now:
- Darkness entered my pines,
- Caressed this and that,
- And then, out of the blue
- A hat with a tilt floated up;
- Such a dashing chapeau.

- Thin fog stole out from the stream,
- A racer slithered into the sward to sleep.
- An oriole kept sewing evening into night.
- I figured: That’s who needed a sieve!
- Only, I thought, why with a tilt?
- And a crane stood in the reeds.

- I wiped my monocle and put it on—
- My goodness, it’s only a canotier . . . 
- The mallards burst out from the sedge—frrr!
- Thinking about it, just how many years
- Flowed ever since into the sieve with a tilt?
- Alas, the chemist is quite right, oh my.

## Note IX

### As If One Salted . . . 

- Some mornings, when your boredom rages,
- It seems you’re waiting for some tip.
- Either you skim through Pushkin’s pages
- Or Pushchin’s volume dully flip.

- The hunt no longer seems arresting.
- Your whipper-in does not take down
- The horn and harness idly resting.
- And hunting grounds in sadness drown.

- And you’re so glum, as one may gather,
- That faithful ale can’t make life right.
- Should you clean your chibouk or rather
- Challenge your neighbor to a fight?

- Or your old robe that’s tight and scratches
- Should you demand to cut today,
- So for the new one you’ll have patches?
- Or should you simply run away?

- Instead, to calm depression’s fervor,
- You take a stroll *pour l’appetite*. 
- And later, with your household servants
- You play *cerceau* just *à petit*. 

- Or risking a snob’s reputation,
- You proudly board your charabanc
- With English Club’s bright decorations,
- And ride stiff like a wooden chunk.

- It’s fall, may readers be reminded,
- Therefore, the last leaf will alight,
- When your gaze, truly absentminded,
- Will bless it on its final flight.

- Dusk, like a wolf from forest’s stubble,
- Yawns, when the lights go on, at last.
- But you forget about your troubles
- And urge the coachman, shouting: Fast!

- Because white flies begin to flutter
- High in the air, for all to see.
- You rush home, open window shutters:
- Oh, nanny, look—what can it be?

- As if one salted over yonder
- Bathhouses, barns, and every hut . . . 
- Ah, snow has fallen! What a wonder!
- And winter started just like that.