---
chapter-number: "04"
title: Dzyndzyrela’s Discords Beyond the Itil
language: en
---

It was Pyotr, one smart aleck from Sloboda, who took 
somethin to town—either to sell or to buy; it’s impossible to make out from such a distance: I went far away 
lookin for seasonal work and my storm lamp doesn’t purrcolate much in the alien darkness, while my years ain’t a match 
for bird’s sight. Pyotr is quite fine, but Pavel, his nephew, is 
worried, he’s sendin him a triangular letter. Their furry-legged 
postal cooer arrives at the lodge, sees how Pyotr with the other 
huntin gards mercilessly abuses the wine, tosses them knucklebones, starts makin noise with songs. The cooer pecks Pyotr 
on his temple and keeps sayin: You, Pyotr, drink your fill, but 
understand the drill. Pyotr takes the letter, opens it, and somethin is written there. My dear uncle Pete—that’s what is written there—I am no longer hopin you’ll bring back any yeast, 
but I keep hopin that durin your mercantile absence from our 
places you did not live like a heartless windbag, but that you 
boldly dreamed about the alphabet. In tears, Pyotr begs his 
comrades in the crashbaret: Help me with advice ’cuz I’m dyin 
here. Pavel sent me to Gorodnishche; who knows whether to 
sell or to buy, I just know he’s mad I’m slower than molasses in 
January, and right now I’ve got neither the merchandise nor 
the money, and even less the yeast vital to him. He’s naggin me 
from the other shore: Do whatever you want, he says, but abstain from an empty-handed return. Well, perhaps it will be 
possible to reciprocally extract the hooch-brewin yeast from 
someone, but where can one get the letter *zhe*; it has stumped 
us, enlighteners. With the letter *ge*, shares Pyotr, we came up 
without a problem; it resembles the gallows, it does, ’cuz on 
the gallows you can pronounce only that letter: *ge*, *ge*, and *ge*. 
The letter *de* is like a dacha, *be* almost like *ve*, and *ve* almost like 
*be*, but *zhe*—that one’s mysterious. At that moment, worn out 
by everyday hardships and by lashin incessant downpours, I 
also report to the crashbaret in person—a prophet who stole 
from Christians two hours of light in the month of July—I 
drop in to celebrate the conclusion of my unsuccessful to the 
hilt and to the core business. I met a certain blind man in an 
unsightly place, and he volunteered to accompany me to the 
water for repose. And I trudged after him, trustin him in everythin, but the darkness engulfed us and for that reason he did 
not notice a huntin pit and tumbled in. I also fell in, followin 
the leader, ’cuz my belt was tied to his with a strong rope so we 
wouldn’t get separated. Halloo, we did not get separated, we 
moaned with banged heads and with dislocations, halloo, we 
did not get separated, we kept jokin, continuin our journey 
with difficulty. But we were jokin untimely, comrades in misfortune. ’Cuz, when it turned light, I discovered that my grindin stand suffered durin the fall more than we did. The main 
wheel had cracked in many places and in that region it was 
impossible to find a competent wheel fixer or a cooper to 
undertake the real repair. Therefore, havin suffered enough 
from sharpenin on the damaged construction, exosted, I was returnin to the winter quarters ahead of schedule. I was ploddin 
with empty pockets and nothin clinked in them. And as long as 
I was ploddin, figurin out with what I was gonna pay in the 
eatery, the main wheel was breakin more and more; it was the 
Hay-rot season. Beside myself, I drop in and greet the tramps 
present there. And meanwhile, the rim finally split in two and 
fell apart. I looked: The pieces were lyin at my feet. Cursin my 
unenviable lot, angry, I roughed up the apparatus to take out 
from circulation the crosspiece with the bushin, which, without the rim, looked strangely orphaned. I took it out, threw it 
on the floor, and spat. And the crosspiece fell precisely between them, between them two rim fragments, while they 
were lyin sorta resemblin two thin crescents, with backs to 
each other and with faces—here and there: one young, the 
other Krylobyl, on the wane. And then Krylobyl, the wise warden, about whom songs were already made in those days, when 
we, dear Pozhilykh of mine, weren’t even close to bein present, 
he, who was registered here from the very beginnin of beginnins, always wore garments lined with fish fur, and brewed 
hooch and rotgut from times immemorial, he squinted, moonfaced, and turned to Pyotr. ’Nuf grievin about your grief, 
Lukich: Ain’t the thing thrown on the floor by one beggar a 
treasure for another one? Look more carefully: Ain’t the thing 
you’re searchin for lyin in the dust of this sickler, thrown there 
neglectfully by Ilya? Pyotr reproaches the warden, puttin him 
to shame: You like to play games with my weak mind, what the 
hell for do I and Pavel need the worthless wheel of the grindin 
mechanism, and it is still unknown whether the owner will let 
us take it, perhaps he himself needs it? Krylobyl teaches the 
one bein taught in the crashbaret on the hill: I don’t wanna 
teach you to pick up someone’s things; you yourself know how 
to do it; I am teachin you somethin else. You are speakin in 
riddles, Pyotr said to Krylobyl, you’re teachin in riddles, to 
Krylobyl said Pyotr, oh, in riddles. And they had a drink. And 
the others, with the exception of this here correspondent of 
Yourses, also had a swig, while the latter just licked his lips. 
Well, said Krylobyl, sniffin his sleeve as a chaser, what kind of 
sound can be heard at the Wolf River, when one of our grinders 
starts workin on his grindin stand, ain’t it *zhe*-*zhe*-*zhe*? Exactly. 
That’s why I am askin, Krylobyl continued talkin to Pyotr: The 
wheel from the grindin stand, which is lyin in the dust of this 
sickler turned upside down, ain’t it sorta-kinda the sought letter? The public looked and gasped—ha, the spittin image. Verily, verily you’re teachin, Pavel and I will have a *zhe*, Pyotr rejoiced, only it’s a pity that money, he rejoiced, I don’t have, 
otherwise I would treat you accordin to your needs. Don’t rack 
your brains too much, Krylobyl calms him down, don’t despair, go and borrow from someone. But from whom can I borrow, despairs Pyotr, if here everybody gets hold of money by 
borrowin. And did you try to ask Manul, Manul beckoned to 
him. And this Manul, permit me to recommend, up to a certain 
time did not use money, even though he enjoyed himself, ’cuz 
he was treated for free, on the house, splittin for this purpose a 
certain madam with a not so bad fysik, who was a server here, 
in the establishment, and indulged the warden in everythin 
from A to Z, and for that reason he was able to put away his 
pension for rainy days. And when they came, when Manul’s 
paramour, light bay from head to toe, sailed away on the inspector’s cutter and left for her abandonee a written note, 
“Don’t look for me, please,” then Manul set out to have a talk 
with the inspector in the Other Places, and came back only 
three years ago. Nothin happened to him—he started enjoyin 
himself again, but now at real cost and, like all of us, makin purchases with what we call cash, which, however, so far he has, 
while in our anaconda purses there is a fundamental confusion. Pyotr sits down next to Manul the warden and looks at 
him from the bottom of his heart. After a while, the latter asks 
Pyotr: Why are you starin at me, haven’t you ever seen me before, and don’t you have nothin else to stare at? Exetera. Well, 
you see, I wanna try, Pyotr apologizes, to borrow some means 
from you. So go ahead, try, Manul instructs, otherwise what’s 
the use starin in vain? Hearin this, Pyotr replies to Manul with 
simplicity: Warden-warden, be my friend, lend me some. I can 
never be your friend, pal; after all, I am a warden and you’re just 
an upstreamer, but money, don’t be cross, I will give you—I’m 
not a cheapskate. And gives him big money. The public lived it 
up well on Manul’s savins, Sidor Fomich, and they also nodded 
to me to join them. ’Cuz, after all, whose wheel cracked, if one 
thinks about it? Ain’t no misfortune without good fortune, and 
so Dzynzyrela suddenly got lucky.

And the river answers my request: I will give you a stone to 
put either under your head or on your neck—take it, be my 
guest, but in the latter case don’t blame me, you won’t eat them 
mussels to your health, alas, but they will eat you with pleasure. 
I respond: Hold on, I’ll postpone my despair for a while, 
gimme the mussels now at dusk. Take off your new fashionable 
pantofle, she says, roll up your *galife* as high as it’ll possibly go, 
step into me up to your knees, and wander slowly, pinchin the 
bottom with your foot; I guarantee you’ll discover what you 
need in a jiffy. I follow the river’s advice and step into it, flowin, 
and eventually stuff my shoulder bag to the gills. I set up in 
some hollow a bonfire—I keep fryin, boilin, bakin, and simultaneously dryin my unsofiscated rags, which, God be praised, 
I still own. They get bigger every passin year; I am witherin, 
wiltin, and at the same time I’m losin my mind. A certain lonesome babe—I repent, I repent, I attached myself to her without 
wakin up the sacred feelins, just to have a harbor, a warm bench, 
or a couch to throw my bones on, as in the workshop the drafts 
blow from all the cracks, the bed is dank, scares-nightmares 
crawl out from all the corners—so this lonesome babe, washin 
my substantial apparels, kept esplainin that my flesh is dryin 
out ’cuz I have no strength to forget Orina. You are stuck on 
her, said my friend, you are stuck, and as a result, my life’s bitter. 
And when you’re sleepin, sometimes you grab me, you shove 
your puppy in all my places, but you call her—and I’m jealous. 
You’re achin for the tart with your entire feeble, booze-infused 
guts and your brains half and half with your snot drip out from 
you and spread on your work clothes, and the winds are dryin 
them. That’s right, Sidor Fomich, You will touch when we personally meet, You will touch the fabric of my mantilla—see, 
like a scab. I pity you, the woman grieved about me, nomadic is 
your lot, you are a bunch of grass, dry and scattered; it would be 
better if He took you to Himself quickly, so you wouldn’t suffer 
no more hardships in this world, wouldn’t blabber nonsense, 
wouldn’t abuse them ironwares in vain, wouldn’t make sparks 
at night, wouldn’t hide them dawns from the useful citizens, 
wouldn’t long no more for the cheater. Otherwise, your bean 
will finally dry up like the vobla and you will become completely stupid, like the dolt at the mill who has lost all his wits 
as if someone hit him with a heavy sack. That’s how she grieved, 
adjustin my old rags, and her jeremiad resounded far and wide. 
And I was thinkin to myself, sittin in the nappin shed: Abandon hopes for my quick departure, I will loom here-there a little more, I will be an eyesore for some folks a bit longer, I will 
breathe down the neck of some folks, I will still lift my walleye 
unto the sky. Mumbo-jumbo, You will probably think, what kind 
of a shed are you talkin about? What can I say? A shed like any 
other, only for nappin. There are containers, all kinds of things, 
spices, food, and about half a dozen of mousetraps manufactured by the Sankt-Petersburg spring co-op. Hard to believe: Is 
it possible that the need for them clapsnaps reached even the 
main capital? There are also brooms, and bathhouse twigs, a 
stockpile of candles, everythin’s in order, everythin’s shipshape. 
But besides this you notice somethin particular: There is a mattress filled with all kinds of stuff. You break your back the entire day, circulate from house to house or from workshop to 
workshop, drop in for an hour to the crashbaret, then you glide 
under the wing of your fiendish witch, and she starts grumblin: 
Go split some logs, go chop the wood, otherwise, lazybones, in 
due course you’ll fly out from these digs. So you’re forced to hop 
and gallop to the log pile, hit and split wood with the hatchet. 
And the only light in your window—spring, April, when you 
can finally vanish into thin air—will shine beyond the Itil until the first mornin frosts. And for now, kiddo, there’s no place 
to go, and the blizzard, fella, wolfs you down. So I chopped, 
hacked—and from that moment until supper Ilya’s involved in 
a smoke break in the shed and a nap on the cherished junk. 
*Gutenacht* to me, but if the nap doesn’t happen? I toss and turn 
and, in order not to lie there uselessly, I patch them gaps in education. The books I own are few but wonderful, old. There’s 
among them one about a mouse. It’s not big, I agree, but, after 
all, the mistress ain’t large either. Once upon a time, it claims, 
there lived an old man and an old woman. Fine, I agree. And 
they had, supposedly, Fenist the bird. Again, I’m not arguin, it’s 
a natural thing; the folk around here are quite poor, but despite 
that, one or two speckled specimens occasionally settle down 
in the attics of some individual owners. But not long, as a rule, 
not long, unfortunately, is the life of them little souls. Somewhere, most likely, it is long, but not here, Beyond the Wolf. For 
reference: I don’t know about you, instigators, but we, grinders 
and wardens, consider Beyond the Wolf those places that lie 
across the Wolf River, regardless from which side you look. I’ll 
esplain on an example. The lonesome babe sends Ilya for some 
late morels—she’s started cravin, You see, somethin salty. I had 
begged the dinghy from the co-op and set off to the Mangy 
Pines. And You remain in the city, even though, undoubtfully, 
I invited You, too: Keep me company, I said. But then, it’s 
not clear if You have a basket. But even if You don’t—no problem, ask some folks to let You carry one for a while, You’re an 
experienced impersonator, refusal would be surprisin. However, in order not to cast a shadow on the fence, so to speak, 
and complicate the enterprise, I—when You start askin—
I will wait in a hidey-hole. I am worried that if they realize that 
You’re sailin for mushrooms with me, then in Gorodnishche’s 
eyes You’ll get, unexpectedly, smeared with dirt. I will wait, 
I will, I’ll pinch some sorrel on the pasture, I’ll pull out some 
wild horseradish for later. Don’t reproach me for curiosity, but 
do You, on Your part, consume this lovely root? Don’t be shy, 
just lemme know. Your word is law. Before You had a chance 
to blink—I already pulled out enough for You, too. And somethin else: Rubber boots, have You managed to procure rubber 
boots for Yourself? I don’t have them, but don’t compare Yourself to me, I am not the best example, from Easter until the Intercession I strut around barefooted—I’m used to it, my sole 
is abrasive, eternal: My heel’s like sandpaper, but even it gets 
penetrated by mornin dews. However, I don’t complain, someone much more famous than we had suffered, recommendin 
we do the same. In contrast, on the Intercession, when the 
frosts harden all the mud—right away I put my *valenok* on and 
no fiend is a match for me. And when the waters freeze—go 
ahead, tie a blade with a rope and vamoose. Therefore, anythin 
else maybe, but a boot, figurelatively speakin, doesn’t pinch us. 
Perhaps You will prick up Your ears in my address: That there’s 
no boot in the grinder’s possession—there’s no special wonder 
either, but by whose generosity did he get hold of the *valenok*? 
I’ll make a confession: I snagged the footwear one day.

Cold, mold, hunger everywhere, ground drafts, typhus—
whatever you want—but with *valenki* there’s a defective. True, 
in the ward, let’s give it its due, there was a pair—but one for all, 
so the patients could take turns and manage their promenaids. 
Usually with a certain colleague we managed for two. Fortune 
smiled on us, you may say; he’s missin this one and I the opposite, so we sniffed each other out like two mutts. Two boots of 
leather flock together; everybody around recognized us with 
respect. To change the dressin, to get a supply of pills from a 
nurse, to deploy ourselves in the corner with the auntie from 
the female ward—everywhere we scurry side by side. Where, 
as in the song, goes the right hoof, there the left claw follows; 
however, over there it resembles more the first, and over here it 
takes more after the second. Irreplaceable for each other we 
were also durin the abovementioned promenaids. ’Cuz, really, 
is it possible to manage a lot individually in the nippy outside—complete gloom. Some barely walkin almost-goner will 
stroll for five minutes, admire the orphan lindens, remember 
his father’s orchard—and he’s had enough. He’ll track back, 
frownin, take off the *valenki* and throw them away: Who’d like 
to slide them checkers with me, he asks, sorta makin a smile 
with his mouth, while melancholy’s eatin him up. Look, be so 
kind, into my stern eyes, look, perhaps, for the last time—that’s 
his philosophy. And my and my colleague’s is opposite. We divide this snow-dusted pair with our hands tremblin from joy, 
each of us puts on what’s his, and we’re hoppin into the open 
air. It is wonderful outside—our native land. Kinda mother, 
but strikingly sly, deceitful. In the beginnin, overall, it appears 
to be—land like land, only poor, with nothin in it. But after 
you’ve made yourself at home, looked more carefully—there’s 
everythin in it, except *valenki*. We hobble, resolutely, to pediatric haunts—come and see: here you’ve got a frozen hill, and a 
snow fortress, like Pyotr Alexeich had in Botfortovo, and the 
hospital cats, fat, well-nourished on our hospital fare, with 
their cheeks, as the sayin goes, visible from the back. There is 
also the hospital coal sled—we used it, too. After sleddin, gettin filthy, and fillin our boot tops with snow, we start a snowball 
fight with the recuperatin young’uns. They hurt, they laugh, 
and thru the pane their doctor shakes his fist in vain, when he 
sees it. At first the kids kept their distance from us, especially 
from me. And why not; even I, before becomin familiar with 
myself, was afraid to stare in mirrors—such a mug is no joke, 
not to mention that the leg of my pajamas flutters empty. But 
gradually the tykes became tame, even got attached to us, I’d 
say. Sometimes, we only hear: Grampa Lyusha—that’s what 
they called me—Grampa Lyusha, tell us a story, give us a piggyback ride, and don’t hide your stump, show us. That is, they 
drove us bonkers. At the same time, to Alfeyev, Yakov Ilyich, 
they stuck like leaves from bathhouse twigs. And he was a poet, 
a versifier, he put together delightful couplets for them; You 
and I are nothin in comparison with him, my Sidor, Isidor. 
I would quote these compositions of his, but I’m afraid You 
won’t approve; they are picturesque, that is, decent not for everybody. For instance, the poem about the homeless dog. 
Once a bitch her cooter against the fence knocked, and now 
she is achin—her cooter got blocked. And after that I am quite 
embarrassed, Fomich. Just imagine: But three friendly stud 
dogs helped her with the pain, they did what was needed—
she’s happy again. Just think! And other pieces similar to that. 
How much fun our nippers had! Well, we did some work, had 
fun with the tots—and the night is fallin. It’s time for us, consequently, to get to the theater. In the thicket stood, secluded, 
under the number one, a hunchbacked house. Not really a 
house but a former chapel with an amputated cross, and some 
whitish plants, perhaps willows, were bendin over it, like anatomists. And a sign with old-fashioned letters announced: Anatomical Theater. A familiar orderly carried out his duties there. 
Right away we go to see him in the cellar: Are you keepin 
watch? Come on, show us your artists. The orderly opens the 
vaults wide: Have a look, I don’t mind, so far I don’t charge for 
shows. He knew them by histories of their illnesses, with all the 
details, by heart—who took poison, who burned from cancer, 
who got crushed, and who went simply out of stupidity. I remember, he had in storage for about two weeks a gal of non-advanced age. On the skinny side, redheaded, collarbones and 
ankels, with curly hair everywhere. Her relatives could not be 
found; it would be time to bury her—but there’s a problem, 
there’s no one to do it. She was nice, very nice, and though 
dead, but not sad; she was smilin—as if it was not about her—
and the decay did not touch her body at all, unlike it does to 
many others. I dare to hope that the serafims were gardin her 
better. She passed away from hot shakes, she entrusted herself, 
unlucky, to some young guy, but was not able to forget him 
soon enough—and goodbye. Orya, I am grief-stricken, Orya, 
is there anyone for whom you did not come true, couldn’t you 
have sheltered Ilya at least? He, the beast, would have saved 
you,  the  beauty,  from  all  adversities,  and  you’d  manage 
together somehow. ’Cuz what is unhappiness and what is happiness, if you think about it? Unhappiness is when there is no 
happiness, and happiness, Orya, is when there’s no unhappiness. But ’nuf grievin. So, dear orderly, splash for us, please, 
some governmental pure grain, give the invaliduals a small 
servin from the big health services. We are suppin and talkin. 
To our hospitable host—a question: How can you stand it to 
work in such a Tartar, ain’t it depressin, ain’t it disgustin? 
There’s disrespect, sounds the answer; pathology is a cruel 
thing, the postmortem medics have no pity on our body, they 
keep guttin, God forbid you croak, they won’t miss a spot. And 
the young female student doctors do the same—such smarty-panties, they grab whatever they can. But move your own 
brain, where could I hop off from the given position, where 
else would I be able to decant free firewater for all of you lost 
souls? And he himself in turn gets desperately concerned about 
us: What on earth made you the way you are, if it’s not a secret? 
I tell him—so and so, this and that way. And Alfeyev, Yakov 
Ilyich—started spreadin war rumors. He reports that not too 
long ago there began, supposedly, the most fiercest campaign, 
and he was shaved, as ill luck would have it, to fight on these 
fronts. To the positions, he recalls, a girl saw the soldier off. She 
saw him off, but there’s shootin, there—the brave commander 
orders: Forward march—he’s cussin—and if you don’t, I’ll 
shoot you. No way out—he had to march, and so, obviously, 
his leg got torn away and thrown behind the fascines. He 
screamed, he admits, like one bein slaughtered. A poet, a loquacious rhymester was Yakov Ilyich: Okeydokey, soldier’s 
walkin, okeydokey, to the war. Or somethin more or less 
civilian, related to transport: When my dear wife, he says, to 
the conductor was promoted, with the controller an affair she 
plotted; I don’t know whether I should even care, but I already 
don’t pay for my fare. Usually our conversations in the mortuary kept flowin like a stream, but even they flowed by and away, 
they poured down like the sand in an hourglass. Everythin 
passes, but the worthy things first of all. Hello, discharge—you 
descended, broke loose. Namely, one resplendent mornin, the 
general hospital evacuator, doctor, visits the dinin hall. Even 
not just a doctor but a hulk of a doc, a fatso. We are havin lunch: 
dinner, that is. It’s brought to our attention that tomorrow 
mornin Sidorov and Petrov with all their possessions are hobblin to disinfection, and afterward with affidavits of inability to 
work are limpin without delay home. We’re in trouble, I and 
Yakov. ’Cuz just for the sake of a good yarn I mentioned here 
Sidorov and Petrov. Upon verification, it turned out that no 
Petrov and even less Sidorov were figures on this flayer’s removal list. Alfeyev and Your humble Ilya were figures there. 
Mayday, Yakov Ilyich, I whispered, we’re bein condemned to 
discharge. And he is requestin an additional servin. And our 
chef-cook, she asks angrily: What, didn’t you stuff yourself 
enough? Alfeyev answers meekly: When I was a nut case, a 
medic woman advised me: When some unpleasant thing happens, munch as much as you can of somethin—and everythin 
will vanish in a trice. What kind of unpleasant thing, the fat 
cook curses the poet, you are stretchin me over the rack. Well, 
such, Alfeyev replies calmly, such, that the chicken we had for 
the second course turned out to be old, and it all got stuck in 
my  teeth.  I  started  wondrin  again,  not  for  the  first  time. 
From where, reveal the secret hidin nothin, from what kind of 
a highway such irrepressible enthusiasts had come about; after 
all, no such speckled bird has yet hatched from the world egg 
that this health center is fated to chew. Our doctors of science 
used to fatten us up with porridge, and Alfeyev claims that it 
got stuck. And not long, not long, I repeat, these small creatures live, since they should never peck on wasps. But even the 
cooer did not peck Petrukha on his temple as hard as they are 
peckin on wasps. And these are infected, sick, and it so happens that the feathered race goes through a plague. In my nappin book it’s written: The speckled one tasted the golden wasps 
and laid for the old folks an egg, not an ordinary one but 
golden. It would seem nothin better could be even expected—
take it and fry. But not everythin turns to Allah’s glory beyond 
the Itil. The old woman tried to break it, tried to break the 
egg—but not quite. Her husband, a feeble seedpod, had no 
luck either. At that moment a relatively small gray mouse was 
runnin by, attendin to her simple needs, and she saw the culinary difficulties. She gained speed, waved her tail, and brushed 
the egg off on the floor. The egg fell and—bang—cracked. 
I realize, I realize, You are befuddled again: Why have you, disfigured Ilya, told me this mouth-to-mouth fable, what impelled-compelled you? I am also apologetic, if that’s the case, 
for dumbfoundin You with my bewilderin story. But why, I’d 
like to know, for what reason did they create the above parable 
at all, what is, I am askin, the point of this once-upon-a-time 
tale? That a mouse is stronger than a man? Doubtful, somethin 
like that does not happen even Beyond the Wolf, and ain’t the 
feeble old people livin right there? Or what? That, perhaps, all 
of us should protect mice, that they can be useful if one needs 
to break somethin in the household? About this we hold strictly 
personal opinion. The same way as we exterminated from times 
immemorial, we gard the tradition now. Are they frog princesses? Do they promise with a human voice a broken trough? 
Please, don’t chastise me, Fomich, but I don’t understand suggestions of this kind. A completely different case is a cabbage, a 
goat, and a wolf—that I understand, at least that is a riddle. But 
not now—now the discharge is tormentin me. And the witchcook gives Yakov Ilyich a second helpin. We each chow down a 
half and start thinkin. Outside, a sheer blizzard twists the tangled hair of the bushes in the front yard and we, urchins, find 
ourselves short of *valenki*. In addition to the situcraption here, 
we don’t hold in our hands any profession whatsoever. Where 
should we, figurelatively speakin, go to learn? You’ll get out, get 
discharged—and the snowstorm will sweep you up like a street 
sweeper with his filthy sweepin broom. Friggin-frigged-frig, we 
started thinkin. And Yakov declares: Whatever it takes, but our 
beloved *valenki* we should remove from the ward, we got attached to them—even more so ’cuz they have galoshes. What 
do you mean?—I asked. I mean a side-warmer far away, when a 
Gypsy slyboots takes his sheepskin to the consignment store, 
when there’s mud-slush—and we’re on skis. I’ve grasped my 
comrade’s reasonin at once and propose before official discharge, without any reparations, to take to our heels. And documents? What do you need these documents for, you won’t get 
full by eatin papers, especially if they’re fake. At least I have real 
ones, he says, but not my own, at the front I served as another 
Yakov, I blew away my exemption to him in backgammon. 
For the sake of appearance, we’ve paged through the journal 
*Pig-Breedin and Youth* and we’re sorta gettin ready for a stroll. 
The floor attendant squinted his eyes and understood: You’re 
splittin? So we’re kissin the communal *valenki* goodbye? Fine, 
take them, we’ll still keep shirts on our backs, with one pair 
we won’t get nowhere all the same. We bowed low, took our 
leave, and descended to the pit: Hey, orderly, orderly, give us 
some chlamyses, after all, how are we gonna reach our destination only in pajamas? And Ivan shakes out from his depot heap 
upon heap of garments: Dig in. How many kindhearted souls 
are scattered around our damp cellars! May you prosper, Uncle 
Vanechka, our male nurse, we are deeply in debt to your generosity. He esplained: Relatives bring new toilettes for the artists, 
and out of fear quite often don’t ask for the worn ones. I selected then for myself a blue admiral’s gala *galife*, I selected 
then a clerk’s top hat with a tilt and a brick-colored Jewish *lapserdak* of cheviot wool. I believe I made a right choice; all three 
fabrics are durable, up until now they are my only outfit. 
What  Alfeyev  chose—I  don’t  recall  right  now,  and  abhor 
makin things up. Perhaps he took the fashionable striped pants 
of antique moiré and a plaid jacket of thick zhorzhet. We got 
dressed, we got robed—So long, benefactor—and we bolted 
in a duet away from all these bandages, findin out beforehand 
information about the needed station: of the railroad, that is. 
Hop, don’t stop, hop, don’t stop, granny sowed the peas for 
crop; we gave it all we got, pullin our peaked caps down over 
our eyes like daredevils. But the storm’s turbulence, You understand, also gave it all it got, roughin us up.
