---
chapter-number: "05"
title: The Trapper's Tale or Pictures from an Exhibition
language: en
---

Yakov Ilyich Palamakhterov (by the way, here is his 
*Self-Portrait in Uniform*; and yet, does it make sense 
to duplicate such impressive canvases without having any perceptible talent for this and understanding beforehand that the visitor will only briefly look at the copy as at the 
most boring detail here; therefore, a little later, getting more 
and more lost and confusing reality with fantasy, he may declare once and for all: Yes, everything was exactly like that; 
and, evaluating it from the side or in a mirror, he may remain 
completely satisfied with his, no, not his, wait a moment, the 
hero’s, of course, the hero’s actions and features; to duplicate 
self-portraits in uniforms—I beg your pardon!) and so, Yakov 
Ilyich Palamakhterov tried not to attract attention. In vain. It 
would be difficult to imagine a man who, thanks to his lack of 
talent for mimicry, would less resemble the Brazilian hunting 
spider or humpbacked Patagonian crickets—cf. Carus Sterne, 
*Evolution of the World, Werden und Vergehen*, translated from 
the German, vol. 3, World Association Publishers, Moscow, 22 
Bolshaya Nikitskaya, printed by I. N. Kushnerov and Company, 
Pimenov Street, entrance from the courtyard; the courtyard is not 
paved; mud is all over. From the carriage that had arrived, two 
printers in aprons, soiled with God only knows what, push paper rolls directly into the puddle. The splashes created by the 
fallen rolls greatly amuse the workers. Having been splattered, 
one after another the bales keep rolling along the courtyard, 
getting wrapped into a finger-thick layer of loamy slush. Noticing the mischief and ruination from the third-story window, 
above the arch, St. Petersburg typesetter Nikodim Yermolaich 
Palamakhterov, great-grandfather of Yakov Ilyich, dispatched 
specially to Moscow on business of the book publishing company Enlightenment, located on the Nevsky, opens the window and curses the lads at the top of his lungs. In front of us 
stands a dandyish, slightly too elegant subject who was able to 
change his travel clothes into the apparel appropriate for a visitor (he is wearing a fashionable wool combo and a fashionable, 
but not excessively so, cravat) and who dropped in this morning to see his old acquaintance and colleague, employed here 
at Kushnerov’s, and who is not in his office now—he went out, 
but will be right back, will just give the order to start in two 
colors, will collect the proofs and ask for the samovar to be 
brought in; good point, after all, *mein Hertz*, one can not keep 
gulping only Entre-Deux-Mers. Having heard above their 
heads the thunderous words of the visiting Zeus, the printers, 
whom we left below, attempt to drop all the paper cargo in a 
different place, which they consider dry, soiling themselves 
and the rolls even more than before; at the same time the 
movements of the printers are extremely chaotic and force one 
to think about the newly discovered apparatus of Monsieur 
Lumière, who acquired the patent last year and—according to 
rumors—already received a pretty centime for his invention, 
named by someone’s brilliant mind a cinematograph. Attracted 
by the noise, the constable, a good friend of the typesetter from 
Moscow, and, in a way, also of the one from the capital, enters 
the courtyard from the street. Displaying his yellow aiguillettes, rattling with his spurs, and huffing under his mustache, 
he ascends the back stairs, unfortunately, quite greasy; in boots, 
wider than tall, but a fantastic cardplayer, skirt-chaser, not a 
complete fool in matters of drinking, with a saber—and altogether a great chap. Bah, Ksenofont Ardalyonych—seeing him 
filling the door, our visitor exclaims a greeting—it has been ages! 
Much, much water flowed by, Nikodim Yermolaich, Ksenofont Ardalyonych replies, advancing with his hands stretched 
out for an embrace. What brings You here? And since Nikodim 
Yermolaich sits down on one, hence Ksenofont Ardalyonych 
sits down on the other stylish Viennese mahogany chair, 
which, purchased by the company for nine and a half rubles in 
assignations, mercilessly cracks during this cruel ordeal, and 
the continuing inseparability of its parts for a moment appears 
to the zealous enlightener quite problematic. However, the 
alarm turns out to be false and the maker-up, relieved, releases 
a stupendous cloud of smoke that gives Ksenofont Ardalyonych a reason to show interest in what club his friend is registered right now, and also in the type of the tobacco smoked by 
Nikodim Yermolaich: Do You prefer Havanas? It turns out that 
for the last three years Nikodim Yermolaich has had an honor 
to be a member of the Jockey Club, and it is a rare week that he 
is not at the hippodrome. And as far as the tobacco is concerned—Yes, You guessed, the same, manufactured in Bremen. 
Super-pleasant, not only the extraordinary lightness but also 
*ambré*, and whatever You would wish for. And look how convenient, everything’s already precut. Most obliged, but we’re still 
puffing the Asmolov smokes like before. Ah, excuse my 
straightforwardness, You disregard them in vain, after all, You 
know, Ptolomey Dorofeich himself gives them praise. Really? 
You must be kidding! Why would I be kidding, my dearest 
Ksenofont Ardalyonych? I and Ptolomey Dorofeich are like 
You and I now—namely, he is a liberal of the most unusual 
disposition, even though, supposedly, a Mason and, as they 
say, not the last figurant in the lodge. What? To lie, Ksenofont 
Ardalyonych, I do not have reasons—I sell it for as much as I 
bought it, and as far as the Havanas, do not even bother doubting, I personally offered him a light more than once. How 
come, do You attend his *jour fixes*? I am not an amateur of unreasonable modesty, the man from Petersburg answered with 
this spontaneous dignity that nowadays cannot be found not 
only in unimportant but also in very important individuals, I 
do not hold it as my principle. Not only *jour fixes*, he continued, aim higher; I am an insider even at his benefits. From 
there they went more briskly. Beyond the windows, the signs 
of the major prospects sped by; on the Palace Square, splashing with the slush the portly policeman from toes to head, the 
charabanc of chatter turned and, having flashed with its spokes, 
shot out onto the Nevsky—it sped by the salons and restaurants, by mirrored shop windows and façades worth millions. 
They chatted about the new Buhre clock and about African Boers, they agreed that the former ticks too loudly and the latter, 
even though boorish bandits, are quite bold—and do not 
judge so you will not be judged. At the same time they recalled 
the trial and judgment of the robbers of the Swiss bank and the 
recent major robbery of the Colorado train, and Ksenofont 
Ardalyonych did not fail to stick a pin into the Americans: Eh, 
what bashi-bazouks, he complained. As soon as they started 
talking about bashi-bazouks proper who, during the last campaign, seized about a hundred of our blunderbusses, bazookas, 
and other muzzle-loaders, and in a barbaric way harquebussed 
the captured cuirassiers and cavalier guards; as soon as they 
touched upon the sad topic of the dozen unfortunate quartermasters and orderlies from the uhlan and artillery ranks that 
were taken hostage and later drowned on the captured French 
felucca sailing under an Italian flag and blown up near Balaklava 
by a Turkish torpedo; as soon as they had mentioned all this, 
when, burdened by a stack of galley proofs, the resident head 
maker-up finally entered the office. On the man who came in, 
besides the unclean lace-ups from Ehrlich, the untidy appearance of which only affirms the business acumen of their owner, 
the reader discovers pinstripe pants and a frock coat. Nikodim 
Yermolaich, why are You—he barks out straight from the 
threshold and with a slight reproach, after only exchanging bows 
with the constable—why are You screaming like a Jericho trumpet; it can be heard as far as the typesetting hall. Have mercy, 
Ignaty Varfolomeich—the enlightener excuses himself—but 
should they be allowed to bathe in puddles such first-rate paper? 
Be so kind, take a look. All three—Ksenofont Ardalyonych, 
Nikodim Yermolaich, and Ignaty Varfolomeich—approach the 
window. Yessiree, *bellevue*, what else is there to say—the guardian of order concludes, having glanced at what is going on in 
the courtyard—and yet, paving would do no harm. But how—the typographer complains—who would give us money for 
such trifles, under the present circumstances? Well, allow me 
to express my curiosity, dear sir, what displeases You in our 
circumstances; moreover, what are You publishing here—pointing to the proofs, the police official continues his interrogation—proclamations? Give me a break, brother—the disheartened maker-up comes up with a rebuke, handing his 
interlocutor one of the printed sheets. Having scanned several 
lines, the uniform of the heavenly color falls into unfeigned 
agitation: Wow, just listen, gentlemen, what kind of appetizing 
disguise has been observed in a certain Brazilian hunting spider, living on oranges! Brazilian? Nikodim Yermolaich asks 
with curiosity so genuine that one would think he spent his 
entire life on this subject. Its cephalothorax, Ksenofont Ardalyonych quotes, turned transparent white, like paraffin, 
while its porcelain-white abdomen sprouts seven fingerlike, 
orange-colored growths, representing stamens of the orange 
blossom. Hidden under this magical attire, the constable continues reading, the spider successfully performs its deadly 
deeds. Just think, my friends, what a rascal! Shocking, the 
guest from the Neva anxiously agrees, I am at a loss for 
words. And also note, Ksenofont Ardalyonych widens the excursus, that among the humpbacked crickets we find several 
species that to an illusion resemble the curved-back thorns 
growing on the branches of *Leguminosae* inhabited by them. 
And the bird’s eye? The host’s question is so unexpected and 
seems so contradictory to the general tone of the conversation 
that Ksenofont Ardalyonych and Nikodim Yermolaich are 
startled, as if someone suddenly fired a montechristo. Do You 
know, Ignaty Varfolomeich orated in the meantime, are You 
aware, esteemed gentlemen, what the bird’s eye is? I know better what a bread pie is, ruffled up like a sparrow, the visiting 
polygraphist rushes forward with a pun. Well, should we not 
assume, the constable dares to enter the conversation, that the 
bird’s eye, speaking, of course, roughly, is nothing else but the 
eye, permit me to say, of a bird, even if quite small. Fiddlesticks, 
Ignaty Varfolomeich, a bilious and highly egotistic person altogether, condescendingly replies; the name of the bird’s eye, the 
typesetter triumphantly announces, is given to the kind of 
birch burl, which is so rare, and for this reason also expensive, 
that the doors made of it in the train cars of His Imperial Majesty are priced at one hundred seventy rubles each. Ksenofont 
Ardalyonych and Nikodim Yermolaich were literally thrown 
off their positions. They got confused to such a degree that for 
a moment became Ksenofont Yermolaich and Nikodim Ardalyonych: The mentioned number mightily mesmerizes the 
opponents of Ignaty Varfolomeich. And God only knows how 
long their confusion would have lasted if the porter Avdey, a 
sleepy peasant with a pitch-black beard reaching up to his dull 
and birdlike tiny eyes and with a similarly dull metal badge, did 
not come to say to the master that they should not be angry—the samovar completely broke and that is why there will be no 
tea, but, say, if needed, there is plenty of fresh beer, brought on 
a pledge from the cabbie, one should only procure a deed of purchase, and if in addition to beer they had wished to have some 
singing girls, they should send a courier to the Yar right away. 
Eh, brother, You are, methinks, not a total oaf, the policeman 
addresses the sentinel—and soon the table cannot be recognized. The prints and typesets are gone. In their place stand 
three mugs with beer, being filled, in keeping with their depletion, from a medium-size barrel that, with obvious importance, 
towers above the modest, but not lacking in refinement, selection of dishes: oysters; some anchovies; about a pound and a 
half of unpressed caviar; sturgeon’s spine—not tzimmes but 
also not to be called bad; and about three dozen lobsters. The 
Gypsies are late. Waiting for them, the companions arranged a 
game of lotto, and none else but Ksenofont Ardalyonych 
shouts out the numbers. Seventy-seven, he shouts out. A match 
made in heaven, rhymes Palamakhterov, even though he has 
no match. Forty-two! We have that too, the man from Petersburg assures, although again his numbers do not correspond. 
Deception of Nikodim Yermolaich is as petty as it is obvious, 
and as outsiders we are quite embarrassed for him; but the pretending of Yakov Ilyich stands out black on white. Possessing 
from his birth the enchanting gift of artistic contemplation, 
but being both shy and frail, now and then he tried not to attract attention to the fact that he was the one whom he, naturally, simply was not able not to be, since he possessed what he 
possessed. For that reason, probably, Yakov Ilyich’s attempts 
turned into complete blunders and consequently led not to the 
desirable but to undesirable results, again and again drawing to 
the gifted youngster uninterrupted, although not always favorable attention of the crowd. Do you remember how once, long 
ago, he let his mind wander, and a gust of the April chiller did 
not wait with ripping off the skullcap from his proudly carried 
head? It is really not important that the street, as ill luck would 
have it, teeming with concerned well-wishers, kept admonishing the hero, warning: Pick it up, you will catch a cold! Ostentatiously ignoring the shouts, taking care not to look back, and 
arrogantly not stopping but turning the pedals forward and—cynically and flippantly chirring with the spokes, the chain, 
and the cog of free wheel—backward, attempting to present 
everything as if he had nothing to do with it, he continued riding, the way he definitely wanted it to be seen through the eyes 
of the side spectator, with melancholic detachment. But, you 
know, a certain superfluous stooping that unexpectedly appeared for an instant in the entire subtle look of the courier 
(exactly like his great-grandfather, his grandfather used to say), 
diminished, even nullified his efforts to make his bodily movements carefree, froze them, made them childishly angular and 
exposed the daydreaming errand boy, with his feeble straighthaired head, to the curses of the mob: Scatterbrain, dimwit—the street carped and hooted. And if it were, let us suppose, not 
simply a slouching, chirring courier but a real humpbacked 
cricket from Patagonia, then, with such a mediocre ability not 
to attract attention, it would have been immediately pecked 
apart. But, fortunately, it was precisely a courier—a messenger-thinker, a painter-runner, an artist-carrier, and the nagging 
feeling that everything in our inexplicable *here* takes place and 
exists only supposedly did not leave him that evening even for 
a moment. That is how, either absentmindedly looking through 
the window or paging in the diffused light of a smoldering 
lamp through Carus Sterne—once respectable and solid, but 
now thinned, reduced by smoking and bodily urges, and yet 
even now adequately representing the sole volume of this 
modest home library—Yakov Ilyich Palamakhterov, the incorruptible witness and whipper-in of his practical and unforgiving time, philosophized and speculated.
