---
chapter-number: "06"
title: Accordin to Ilya Petrikeich
language: en
---

With what does the station’s waitin room wallop us tactlessly on the nose? Don’t consider 
it a complaint, but in its mass the public stinks 
like a wet and homeless dog. Our armpits started hurtin from 
ice-covered roads, migraine blurred our eyes. Due to fatigue, 
we visit a railroad drinkin hole—we’re takin medicine. I asked 
Alfeyev, where are you goin now? He considers: Mother Russia 
is huge, playful, and she barks like a she-wolf in the fog, and 
we, like flies, hop on the top of her, and she bites us out one 
after another as we hop, and it’s impossible to figure out where 
it would be best to jump off, halloo, ever. True, Yasha, halloo, 
in our radiant country we’re all like a bone stuck in its throat, 
we’re all debtors, we’re all at fault. And my real mother, he said, 
perhaps died, and I’m lackin a permanent father ’cuz of alcoholism; I only heard he was called Ilya. Yasha, my dear, perhaps I am he, perhaps there happened some kids in a hurry, 
after all, life is also huge. I allow that, answered Ilyich, but if it’s 
so, why did you completely abandon my mother, did not help 
the woman get her son on his feet, did not give him a vocational education; after all that, you are a rat for me and not dad. 
And he got offended. Yakov Ilyich, I cheered him up, stop bein 
cross, perhaps I am no father of yours at all, calm down a bit, 
do not get too excited, do not. Excuse me, he says, I blew my 
top, perhaps you ain’t my father. But it’s possible, I am hangin 
on contrariwise, it’s possible that precisely your father, who 
knows? Therefore, let me be not simply a father but a possible-father, I will be a possible-father to you. Be so, uttered Alfeyev, 
why should I care? In that case, I take the lad on his word, you 
could lend me, such an inexact dad of yours, money for a ticket 
without a reserved seat: Gimme an advance, I need to get to the 
Tower Junction, to a certain Joy Whatshername. Don’t refuse 
the request, help the old man, ain’t you his flesh and blood, 
perhaps? Yakov Ilyich sheds crocodile tears at the train station: 
Daddy, Ilyusha, prodigerant, you’re gettin ready to see our 
mother, even if she’s no longer among the livin, perhaps. I got 
confused: Why her exactly? ’Cuz, he says, she also worked at 
the station. And what about her last name, first name, and initials in general? Well, I don’t give a darn about them initials, he 
screamed, whatever they might be, why are you goin on like a 
stranger of little faith? And he bought me a ticket to the Tower 
Junction. For farewell we hugged, smooched—so take care, we 
won’t see each other, the huge she-wolf is spread far and wide. 
And he gave me substantial notes; I received them, crumpled 
them, stashed them in my *valenok*—and adieu. I am ridin on 
the train, broodin: You’re a miserable wretch, Yakov Ilyich, 
an orphan, your father is a swindler, a rapscallion, he did not 
help your mother at all, and the latter was of easy virtue, and 
there is, very likely, hardly a spot to put a proof of purity on her, 
even if she ain’t the one Whatshername. Those from the Tower 
Junction, they are all nothin but fine broads—whether this 
one or the twelfth, but, anyway, I am goin to this one, ’cuz the 
twelfth I don’t freakin need. That’s what I was thinkin about my 
relatives, languishin in the pitiful car with no reserved seats, 
amidst all the others afflicted, like me, by poverty. And it was 
rockin on switches. Roll up your eyelids like a pant leg, bare 
your stump, too—so it is more spectacular—and scoot to the 
car with reserved seats: Your instrument’s with you. Immediately start a melody and announce over the knockin and dancin 
of the wheels that you know no peace, and don’t have any joy 
either—you suffered a misfortune. And after that esplain what 
happened. But don’t be concerned about nourishment, don’t 
beg for Christ’s sake, don’t moan and don’t groan, and, speakin 
heart-to-heart, carry high the lofty name of the folk invalidual, 
since even the most horriblest of us is better than fowls of the 
air. And those who get emotional—they will loosen their purse 
strings on their own. So you begin the concert. I will stretch a 
spool of thread to the green lea’s end, or I’ll pound a telegram to 
my dearest friend. Here it is, the much-beloved Russian song; 
it flows and splashes all over the premises—and the journey 
is long. And from where, You’ll inquire, do you, Ilya, have an 
acordeon, have you sold some manure, Your Lameness? No, I 
haven’t sold any manure and such an extraordinary dough, to 
buy the music, I haven’t ever held in my hands out of principle. But our real world does not befall us without such generous 
souls as our orderly. They brought to Uncle Vanya at the theater an artist from the outskirts, a victim of dangerous razors, 
in a tilted cap and with a gold tooth. And he was, apparently, 
such a passionate musician that even his *kirza* boots were like 
an acordeon. At the same time his three-row instrument was 
brought along with him. The male nurse credited the account 
on behalf of the poor, but, he used to say, the bandura appears 
to be of no use: Whenever I try to play, right away it becomes 
clear I don’t know how: either my hands are shakin or my voice 
breaks up. But I, I kept promisin, I know how, just let me. They 
handed it over. How I pulled the bellows, how I worked out a 
fingerin on them pimples! Now play somethin ours, the orderly 
implores, yank away! Once the boozin started, I whipped chastushkas at a full swing. Crematorium they were tryin, homeless 
vagrant they were fryin (the management’s so shrewd), they 
look in—and he is teasin: Close the door, my butt is freezin. 
Whoever was present there in the cellar broke into a crazy 
dance, and look, even Yakov Ilyich on his one and only makes 
a freak of himself. Uncle Vanya also bends his knees and I hear, 
as if in a heavenly swoon: I see, I see, you can, here’s the hurdy-gurdy for you from my white shoulder.


And in trains they simply could not stop praisin me. One courier even called me to his compartment: Let me pour you a 
drink. Ain’t You disgusted hobnobbin with me? Phew, he 
laughs, I used to gobble from the common bowl with worse 
than you. And he pours. Why are You temptin me, citizen, 
what if I don’t hold back? Be so kind, go ahead. And he’s completely bare, like a cantaloupe. I gulped. And he goes: At a train 
station there sat a soldier, a rake and dandy, brother-in-arms, 
just a lieutenant by rankin order, but a field marshal of female 
charms. I am a brainy bayan player, I made up a melody for him 
on the fly, in two-fourths. A certain madam entered the station, 
and she was serious, graceful, and neat; lieutenant quickly 
stood at attention and dropped his breeches straight at her feet. 
And a chorus. And I, too, said my travelin companion, was a 
lieutenant, like in the song. I wore cartridge belts and a mustache, but due to my manners and my rank, I was registered as 
a deputy. But not of some railroad female charms, no, in my license I was registered as a deputy inspector of all cast-iron 
roads. And he pours me, just imagine, Armenian delight. You 
must have lost Your mind, to waste three stars on a person with 
no passport. And he only sparkles with his buttons. And for 
that reason, he admits, the railroad destiny is dear to me, I got 
used to it, I’m ashamed to say, I love, excuse me, scrambled 
eggs and tearin at full speed in an express rushin on. And where 
do you think I am goin right now? Don’t be angry, I answered, 
I have no clue about Your travel plans, so far I am not buyin 
Your tickets. So far others are buyin tickets for Ilya. Do you 
think that I planned to visit for a while my brother in Kazan?—the lieutenant kept questionin. Who knows what You do, I personally would gladly go to visit my brother out of the blue, and 
then enjoy yourself as much as you like, eat-drink-sleep. If you 
get bored, you can call to a get-together the neyborly Musia or 
you can wander with a dragnet for a while. You wander like 
that, You know, up to your waist in water, and the slimy clay 
keeps squeezin like leeches between your toes, it even curls. 
I get your drift, the inspector nods; frankly, my own brother is 
a drunk. What can I say, deputy, a brother—a brother is there, 
but he doesn’t send me lately any invitations, and what’s goin 
on with him, I have no clue: Did he get married, is he sick, or is 
he clinkin with his irons somewhere? No need to guess, he answered, obviously with them. But, to be honest, lieutenant, I 
don’t recall that he scribbled to me particularly often; no, not 
often did he scribble to me, even to express it better—he never 
wrote to me at all. In irons you won’t do much writin, the lieutenant kept noddin, in the environs of Kandalaksha. Yes, and, 
You see, it’s unlikely that I would put my head on a choppin 
block for You to prove that this brother exists anywhere at all; 
I suspect that he’s not present in my inventory, regrettably—neither in Kazan and Ryazan, nor in Syzran. Well, then, he says, 
allow me, I will pour you for that again. And both of us took a 
swig. And the train speeds on with widely open orbs, cuts the 
young night like a sharp speed skate, shines into a distance 
somewhere with a pair of manul’s eyes. In the scraps of the 
same night dozes, quietly snoozin, snuggled like a needle in a 
haystack, the transit passenger after surgery, like I, and to him 
the train seems to have a completely unearthly destination. 
Woe is me, old chap, the inspector sighed, in Syzran my relatives don’t live right now, in contrast, in Millerovo, please—in 
Millerovo there’s a full *assorti*; incidently, my godsister passed 
away there not long ago. And he introduces himself: Yemelyan 
Zhizhirella. Holy crap, I declared. And immediately embraced 
him, fatso, and he me, a humble stick. And we drained one for 
*Bruderschaft*. So why didn’t you write to me, I reproached, you 
could’ve at least dropped me a postcard; and you dare to call 
yourself a onewomber. Don’t get mad so quickly, he esplained, 
I had no time to write letters in the environs of Kandalaksha, in 
the slammer, better tell me, why do you forget your relatives: 
For example, durin the wake in Millerovo I don’t recall seein 
you at all, hadn’t you received the news? As far as receivin is 
concerned, I did receive it, by hand delivery. Right away, I grab 
my cap, catch the droshky—and to the station. I run up to a 
formidable one with a saber: What’s where here? He points 
out. And the saber has a little wheel at the bottom, to drag it 
more smoothly. Miss, be so kind, a ticket with a reserved seat to 
Millerovo. A saber like that is stronger than a bullet, ’cuz sooner 
or later the lead will get flattened, but from the steel you won’t 
wiggle out at any price, from this here steel. At the platform—
high culture: spittoons and a kiosk. Eighteen minutes. And uncertainty seized me. When I arrive—there will be no end to 
gossip, they’ll imagine, most likely, who knows what. They 
have no clue, my skinflint kinsfolk, that not everybody is necessarily a cheapskate. Ilya does not need what’s someone else’s, 
he doesn’t even have what’s his own, but try and esplain. You 
can choke on your wake, I won’t go. I am standin. Here the 
conductor sounds the boardin, there the wagon usher curses, 
and over there an old lady knocks like a moth against a window 
glass: Dimka, her grandson, be so kind to notice, is departin to 
visit his uncle in Uglich. Watch out, my urchin, don’t go walkin 
in the heat without mittens. You yourself, skinny worm, keep 
both eyes open, otherwise someone may prematurely shake 
off your dust. Well, old man, I address the chief, are we doin the 
departure? And why are You intrested?—he pulled his railroad 
cap on his brow. I answer that for me it doesn’t really matter, 
that I would like to ask about somethin else, and the departure 
itself doesn’t bother me from any side, that—who cares about 
departure, go on, depart. About what else?—he teases. Have 
You ever been present at trottin competitions? It’s not the right 
word—present, I loitered there, I used to lose big sums on wagers. So You must remember how the hippodrome was burnin 
and the sparks were flyin, right? How could I not remember, 
they kept flyin, at first there were even plans to cancel the heat. 
There were plans, but the deal fizzled off—and the horses 
started traversin. From the very start, I remember, Polykleitus, 
the black three-year-old from Polytechnician and Kleptomania, 
jumped forward, but the mare Sour Cream reached the second 
turn first, and Polykleitus dropped to the third, and who was 
ridin him at the moment—my memory broke the loop. Well, if 
it broke then it broke, said the railman, but we better finish 
now with them horses, ’cuz to interrupt the departure, bein elderly, does not become You. You’re puttin on much air, old 
man, why don’t You, instead of ringin the bell, quickly deal us a 
hand? Right then, the saber rolls in: What’s up? Well, this—the 
departee proposes to deal a hand. Well, delay won’t make it 
rusty, it’s not a little wheel, we only need to procure unmarked 
cards. Just wait with the cards, he’s simply tryin to interrupt the 
departure. Have mercy, the gard flew into a rage; this is simply 
espionage of some kind. Don’t chastise, it won’t happen again, 
You understand, Your bell brought past thoughts to my mind, 
one was hangin at the races before the fire—like two peas in a 
pod. It clinked and clanked—and started rollin irrepressibly. 
In those twisted years, I had with me, even though personally 
I don’t believe it today, a commendable suitcase of crocodile 
leather. By the way, why twisted? Years like years, not more 
twisted than the others. A suitcase of crocodile leather, I 
repeat, with locks, in those years like years, I, Dzyndzyrella, 
dare to claim, did have. I grab it—and take to my heels. And it’s 
lashin—hard to describe. As we know, both the train and the 
rain were goin—one to Millerovo, the other all day. Dear bro, 
Yemelyan declares, how great it is to ride at full speed together 
to visit you in Kazan; after all, we haven’t seen each other for so 
long. Wait a minute, I’m gettin anxious, and did you send me a 
postalgram? Why do you ask, straight from the road. So now I 
am runnin along the embarcadero, I catch up with the train car, 
but to jump in, due to the lack of conviction, I’m afraid. Polishin floors in all possible places in those years like years, I carried in my suitcase waxes, rags, rubbed felt, and brushes of pig 
bristle. My train usher with signal flags in cases screams his 
lungs out from the gangway: Let go, or You’ll suddenly plunge 
and make a fool of Yourself, like many others did. Linen mistress, don’t mock the passenger misfortune, go plunge Yourself. And to Yemelyan I said that, halloo—his dispatch will not 
catch up with me and that most likely he’s hurryin to Kazan in 
vain—I will not run out. While to You, Sidor Fomich, I am 
writin approximately what follows. One day some folk come to 
the ferryman, and he’s sleepin soundly like a baby. Yes, this I 
understand, this is a riddle, ’cuz it’s a riddle and not simply a 
peasant true story. Only I don’t understand to which ferryman: 
We have two ferrymen on the Itil. That one makes money on 
that side, this one—on the contrary—on this one. The first, 
Yeryoma nicknamed Cad; the second, in contrast, Foma, and 
without any nickname. He’s called respectfully by his last 
name, so why make a fuss, don’t you think? Doom—that’s the 
last name of our boatman. And let’s suppose they come exactly 
to him: There’s work. He woke up—what kind of work? Why 
are you full of yourself for no reason, they say, as if besides ferryin you had a clue about some other trade? I won’t allow anyone to lecture me, noted Foma, you better lay out the fact. And 
the deputy flew into a rage, stomps his feet, as if I was guilty; 
even I, the orphan, never met myself in Kazan, to tell the truth. 
Well, so where am I rushin now, the inspector shouts, tell me. 
Deputy, I draw a blank about your intricate itineraries, but if 
you have in your hands your travel document, don’t consider 
this disrespectful and look at it—it’s stated there. To be endlessly in trouble is Ilya Dzhynzhirela’s lot. Plunge Yourself, my 
train usher heard my words. I said it to him rashly—and 
plunged myself. What a mess, pal, I plunged, fell like a sack 
under the wheels, and my bare footsie got sliced off like with a 
sickle. I see—someone familiar with a blade flies down from 
the heavenly rafters to help. Six-winged serafim, gardian, swing 
your *yatagan* once, chop off the whole me from these here 
places: I’m hurtin a lot, clumsy me. And the chief arrived in 
time to scold. For You it’s nothin, he got envious, You’ve secured a sanatorium for Yourself, but people will get a reprimand on Your account. Don’t curse, after all, weather’s wet, so 
one slips. A thought: Apparently the expedition failed, crashed, 
the last rites are waitin for Ilya. And I’m in trouble again, 
when, smug, I advise the lieutenant to look at his ticket. You’re 
a boob, he cuts me off, a deputy due to his title is not obliged to 
buy tickets, and even when he buys sometimes, he buys a special one to any destination, and whether you look at that ticket 
or not, everythin’s a fog, and whether its presenter is goin here 
or there, nobody understands, only the ticket with the reserved 
seat flutters in the wind and a coupon for obtainin bedsheets 
rustles. Yep, you sure didn’t luck out, my countryman, but apparently not always and not everywhere deputies have advantages. It turns out that non-deputies sometimes know better 
where their road leads. Take me for example—to Orina, 
gimme her here and now, I’m holdin my course to her.