---
chapter-number: "07"
title: Notes of a Hunter
language: en
---

## Note X

### Over the First Powdered Snow

- The recipes of Bordeaux Gypsy women
- Who are pressing deux côtes and châteaux 
- While the street-organs’ waltzes are streaming
- The distilling plant does not know.
- But inspectors know and adore—
- For that reason, they never feel blue—
- The sacred strength of Cahors,
- With their thick maroon bottom goo.
- Of this drink, first rejected, then stolen,
- In embroidered bags of their own,
- Many jugs and bottles they’re hauling
- Right over the first powdered snow.
- They bring many tasty provisions:
- Canned goods and sausage, and cheese.
- My inspectors, my rustlers, envision
- That these endless feasts never cease!
- But there brightly sparked as before—
- ’Cause the utter darkness moved far—
- In the whitened grave of the shores
- Negru de Purcari red tar.
- Though the curious hunter is saying:
- Where do pheasants get fat around here?
- Through the scraps of the dogs’ furious baying
- Sesame!—that’s all we can hear.
- Co-imbiber! The last gulp, my dear bloke,
- Stash in your flabby cheek and hold there.
- It’s time. Whir in barrels’ half chokes,
- And in chokes, you whirlwind, whir-whir.

## Note XI

### Casting a Spell

- May the Magpie be sick, may the Crow be sick too,
- May the Dog be healthy and glad.
- A cripple was walking around the world blue
- And his crutches were splattered with blood.

- His crutches walked over the snow’s bluish crust
- And the clouds were revealing God’s face.
- And while sand-covered Libya was choking in dust
- The Netherlands held the ice-skating race.

- The Wolf was taught by the mage hereabout,
- So leaving his lair in the woods,
- Just after the sunset, the Wolf would crawl out
- And heal the Dog as he could.

- May the Magpie be sick, may the Crow be sick too,
- But thanks to Wolf’s love, in its name,
- From the black river Crow to the river Nerl blue
- May the sick dogs be healthy and game.

- And in their shabby coats, in the blue world, outbound,
- Not concerned if it is night or day,
- Valiant hunters, making magpie-like chirping sounds,
- Chased the ermines from the copses away.

- Village folks, but alert and rarely forgive.
- May Magpie the Thief still be sick.
- They’ve spied out the place where this fellow lives
- And lifted, the rascals, his sticks.

- They drank them away and that would be all,
- But when winter unleashed ice and snow,
- Between self and Wolf, when sleep takes its toll,
- The Dog to the Wolf used to go.

- The Magpie is sick and the Crow is sick too,
- The blizzard for the cloud ride can’t wait.
- Village folks, mainly loners with nothing to do,
- Glide on skates with hands on their waists.

- And from the flat Brugge to the mountainous Liopp,
- Or to Bydogoshchi from as far as Bobrov,
- Factory hunters, loudly shouting, “Hey, hop!”
- Drink, enshaded by the snow-covered groves.

- At last, our cripple a new shotgun obtained
- And found other crutches somehow.
- Though his empty pant leg may still feel the pain
- He’s a factory hunter right now.

## Note XII

### Philosophical

- Confusion—it’s an inevitable fault
- Of clueless philosophers, passions, ages . . . 
- What kind of luck made me such a dolt
- That I could not make sense of them all
- Or rather could, but less and less, in stages?

- When ways of knowledge came to be too dreary,
- And city life, unsettling, hard to follow,
- First, I became a hunter—ordinary,
- But later turned into a binger—merry,
- With gaze both enlightened and quite hollow.

- I like all months, December up to March,
- Plus April, May and June, July and August,
- And Virgo always warms my lonely heart,
- And Brumaires, whose rosy garb, so smart,
- Brings to my mind the famous bird named Argus.

- Now chilly winter in my garden stands
- Like emptiness forgotten in a glass.
- The glass, forgotten, on the table stands.
- The table, forgotten, in the garden stands,
- Forgotten on the winter’s white tray-grass.

- Dear maestro, on the stovepipe wail
- Something Christmasy—and make it andante.
- Cold, with icicles on its lip, today,
- Winter stands here, like a thing per se,
- Noticing, really, neither Kant nor canto.

## Note XIII

### Valday Dream

- Just before the stars unfold
- From the smoke I’m crying.
- The wolf’s tail—be cold, be cold,
- The dog’s—warmed by fire.
- By the hearth, deep in his lair,
- Cat snores, as he dozes.
- And his boot, in disrepair,
- Sticking nail exposes.
- And he dreams, this Valday Cat,
- Purring-Puss, while snoozing:
- On the bridge sit wolves all set,
- Therefore, he is musing:
- If I were a dog, I’d love
- The Wolf who’s so lonely,
- And if I were a wolf I’d howl
- After the Dog only.
- From a window I’ll look out
- Or glance from another—
- A snow-dusted pine stands proud
- In the glade snow-smothered.
- Witches chat of times of old
- By the graveyard’s pyre.
- Holy tail—be cold, be cold,
- Devil’s—warmed by fire.
- And completely bluish-gray
- Is mica-covered Volga.
- The Dog’s riding in a sleigh,
- Prodding the Wolf onward.

## Note XIV

### Fishing Under Ice

- Neither the sturgeon fish live in this river
- Nor the Chauliodus fish in a shoal.
- So why do I, like an anglerfish, shiver,
- With my mouth open by the ice hole?

- Fellow, limp home and better be gone!
- The time for playing has passed.
- And the curtain of tattered dawn
- Onto Europe concealed *wasisdas*.

- Listen, you Binger, scram or you’ll lose!—
- I held myself in a firm rein.
- Better swallow some rotgut, infused
- Half and half with the tears of grain.

- Whom is God guiding down over here,
- With a lamp, on ice skates, half bent?
- Well, Aladdin Bartrutdinov is near,
- By Allah the Tatar is sent.

- Eh you, humpback, you are no angel,
- Go to hell, you blasted slime!
- What’s your lamp for, you alien stranger,
- During this somnolent time?

- *Yakshi*, you fish bait, did you catch your fill?
- Hunchbacked pony, skedaddle, rock!
- You are a disease, you make the soul ill,
- Bartrutdinov’s been a hundred years *yok*.

- He fell through the ice while skating at dusk,
- And only surfaced after a year.
- In his pocket dominoes as well as a flask,
- And chewed off by fish lips and ears.

- I forgot the date he came back afloat.
- Pyotr and Pavel found him at large.
- They finished the flask, then played whack the goat,
- And informed the folks in charge.

- He took off. Ah, what a deceiver.
- And he used to be a loner first class.
- Neither the chimaera fish live in this river,
- Nor the fish, for instance, hump bass.

## Note XV

### Archival

- Oh, I will feel so stuffy
- Filling the dusty shelves
- Of the archival stacks.
- Eh, I’ll be bored to death.
- One day and out of breath
- An archivist will come.
- He’ll start to excavate me,
- My doodles he’ll decipher,
- And dig up in old files
- A ticket to Kunstkammer,
- A petal from some summer,
- And ’mid the other notes,
- This one he’ll find, indeed,
- And ’bout himself he’ll read.
- Ha ha, he’ll laugh, ha ha,
- All through the archive. Rude,
- Unpleasant, and irate,
- A hunter out of date
- And yet astute and shrewd.
- And how excited he’ll be
- With what he had found out.
- And he will be, just be,
- While I’ll be gone, away,
- Each week and every day.
- But how eternal I’ll be—
- No present and no past,
- Away from taking chances,
- In crowded circumstances,
- And suffocating dust.

## Note XVI

### A Verse About a Beautiful Lonesome Babe

- Over the coffeepot the steam waves
- Like a capitulation flag from a trench.
- Brew me some coffee, my lovely wench,
- Because this draft is worthy of raves.

- Keep waving, broadcast the news from Brazil,
- This aroma is praised all around,
- With chicory it can always be found,
- Even when from Brazil there is nil.

- By fate we’re so often rebuked
- That chicory we love like the Erzia,
- But aren’t we somebody’s ersatz
- And isn’t our goose fully cooked?

- For that reason, though I know in my soul
- That all beauties are easy to flatter,
- I declare that it does not matter
- Who is mending my coat and my shawl.

- Notwithstanding that no one can sew
- Out of sweet talk fur coats, I’ll opine:
- Oh, my lonesome babe, you’re so fine,
- And your mug’s not to drink from, you know.

- So I sharpen my penknife, I do:
- Since the day of your angel is near,
- Having nothing to give you, my dear,
- A boar’s hide I will scrape just for you.

- Brew me now, at the threshold of dusk,
- In midevening, at pre-winter’s boding,
- Pseudo-coffee that a quasimodic
- False matchmaker had kindly loaned us.

## Note XVII

### To the Unknown Painter

- Buddy! Like a Serb can’t make
- A Croatian *chisma* fit,
- And our own memorial wake
- Or the cabbage soup’s high price
- Often bore us quite a bit,
- The same way this harsh advice
- Painters like you really need.
- Either you mixed up the features
- And impressions of the past
- Or the Gorodnishche’s picture
- Without glasses you recast.
- Hence the hunters you arranged
- In old-fashioned cowls and clothes
- Seem to me no less than strange,
- Even more, in panty hose.
- And the deal would not have ended
- With success, as we would like,
- If the hunt we had attended
- Not with guns but with a pike.
- On which, well seen from this angle,
- Right behind the hunter’s back,
- Hangs the image of a tangled
- Wolf-dog, waving like a flag.
- On the things’ established order
- You applied a fancy veil:
- Hunting bags with gold embroidered
- Are at odds with our trails.
- And from crashbaret three lookers
- Seem too pretty and too neat,
- When, unhurried, they are cooking
- A plump piglet on the spit.
- And this dolce vita, master,
- Shaded by the roofs askew,
- Which you tried so hard to muster
- With your brush, palette, and luster,
- It is gone, wrapped in weeds’ cluster.
- But crows are the same—so shoo!
- Nonetheless—what a great picture,
- Look around you once or twice,
- And admire those bewitching
- Brews of sky, and snow, and ice.
- In the time of twilight pealing,
- The ice skaters’ puppy squealing
- Can be heard from far beyond—
- On the river and the ponds.
- If I were a merchant mogul
- Your oil painting I would buy,
- Hang it o’er my cot to ogle,
- And, forgetting all, I’d lie.
- But because I am a tippler,
- I will buy me some green wine
- And I’ll see the same, but triple
- When the drink starts working fine.
- Here’s my fatherland: Though glorious,
- It cares not for poor folks’ strife,
- But how lovely’s the notorious
- Vanity of our life.

## Note XVIII

### Transfiguration of Nikolay Helperov

#### (A Junkman’s Story)

- There’s a reason for the vagrants to attest:
- Sweet agarics on the Volga are the best.
- But some people just surprise us, when they muse:
- Vodka is the worst of poisons, of no use.
- By this judgment, pardon us, we’re not impressed,
- We, the junk folk, life without it cannot see.
- True, sometimes we *imbibamus* in excess,
- But in turn how much transfigured we may be.
- Once from house to house we wandered-tramped,
- Asking people: Help your guests, for goodness sake,
- Bring outside your garbage pile, clean your dump:
- Metal, glass, and even bones we gladly take.
- Dusk has fallen. And of course—a snowing fest.
- Freaking bitch, don’t you growl and don’t you bark!
- We set out to see the tailor, get some rest,
- Helper Kolya schlepped with us, and it was dark.
- Kolya Helperov, I meant to say, who was old,
- Broken up, a guy with badly twisted legs.
- We are pilgrims—he’s one far above us all,
- We are cripples—he’s one far above the rest.
- Our Kolya-Nikolay owns simply nil,
- Only crutches. And it snows, it really snows.
- Weather sucks. The bells clamor on the hill,
- And to find a place for slumber fly the daws.
- They fly straight across the river, scalawags,
- To the town of thieves and beggars for a nap.
- While we’re lugging on a hand sleigh garbage bags—
- Three archangels of recycling the old scrap.
- Ah, the time of dog and wolf I love so much:
- It’s like kindness mixed with sadness, isn’t it?
- I will also have a smoke; hold the match!
- So, we’re schlepping to the tailor, I repeat.
- Sewing clothing for the shelter of the blind,
- Our tailor’s sitting there by candlelight.
- Open up, dear fellow creature, be so kind,
- Welcome us—exhausted merchants—for the night.
- We were sitting by the window, feeling fine,
- Night was turning gray like pants too often washed.
- I forget now, where we finally got the wine,
- But remember—we got very soundly sloshed.
- In the morning, we see: Kolya learned to fly!
- Crutches—like a pair of wings he bore.
- He had turned into a falcon, poor old guy.
- Drank too much. And he simply was no more.
