---
chapter-number: "08"
title: Discords Beyond the Itil
language: en
---

I have scooped up, keep on readin, the hooch of human 
passions, tasted the rot of dreadful, deceitful broads, and 
the poison almost choked me. The dusk lasted and the 
darkness continued, and at dawn opened, like a wound, the unquenchable drought for the clean, for the crystal-clear water. I 
used whatever I had for a belt and stepped, figurelatively 
speakin, into the deep, squirmin. What is happiness and what 
is unhappiness, my dear Pozhilykh? Don’t pass, the answer 
ain’t complicated: Happiness is when it is. But I don’t complain; everythin will get milled over. We’ll finish clinkin with 
our unsharpened skates, hurtin from oaken clubs, frolickin and 
dancin, and one day in the mornin we’ll cast off to Bydogozhd. 
So many toasts will be drunk in our honor, so many tears will 
be spilled, so many collars will be ripped by our pals from each 
other’s coats on the ninth day. Earlier, we were seein others off, 
sailin noisily in sloops, and now others will revel followin us in 
dories, while we will peacefully lie in the front one with our 
sole akimbo. Foma Doom himself on the occasion of such an 
event rekindled his past—grabbed the oars. He is rowin, for 
sure, but at the same time on the sly searches with his bare foot 
the pockets of my gala apparel. You’re tryin in vain, my dear, 
they cleaned up all the creases before you, not even one 
bit of tobacco is left. No, don’t take me wrong, I’m not 
complainin—there will be flour. I wandered a lot, worked and 
exosted myself, yet even more I twiddled my thumbs. I toughened and matured, got smooth and burnished, like a well-worn 
yoke. I turned into last year’s old loaf, a callus and gristle, and 
wasn’t I a fancy bun just last evenin? I’ll turn around, fold my 
earflaps up, and look at myself hurryin in burlap along the 
speckled way—there I feel high, close to the Lordie, there I feel 
glorious. I’ll feast my eyes. Who am I, they ask sometimes, and 
for whom? I’m a matchmaker and brother for someone, for 
someone a godfather, and occasionally a son-in-law, I guess, no 
more, no less. But sometimes—I am nobody for nobody, only 
for myself, and even then not entirely. Now a slicker and roisterer, I tumble into the burdock—tomorrow a marsh hawk, 
I’m hootin like an owl in the pine grove. But when I sleep myself sober I’m a prophet again. That’s nothin, really, compared 
to the moment when once in a blue moon, I walk along the 
speckled path to do my sharpenin: I turned into a Sharpener, a 
craftsman of the unfamiliar suns. There, on the right side, burn 
the Fiery Stozhary—here, on the left, rises Krylobyl, the clubfooted hunter. Behind me are the Nurses, in front—Orina-Foolina and her progeny Orion. I wandered a lot around the 
world’s fringes and defined many constellations. There is a constellation of Lonesome Babe, only I cannot figure out which 
one; there are Lieutenants, Buoy Keepers, and Inspectors. There 
is a Bingin Hunter, a lively carouser in this world, a fine fellow—
notorious  for  his  unquenchable  thirst  and  extraordinary 
boldness as far as and includin the Kimry model sluices. He’s 
writin somethin, flippin the pages: Will You allow me to cite a 
few thoughts? Ain’t it wrong, he claims, to pour this year’s wine 
into an old barrel? It will tear apart all its seams, it will warp 
the thing, and, what’s even worse, it will spill out. Good, 
good advice, nothin to argue about. The only thing—it doesn’t 
concern us, he’s not talkin about our destitute Beyond the 
Wolf, since how could we get hold of so much wine to fill at 
once the entire barrel—makes no difference whether new or 
secondhand—for what kind, allow me to express my doubts, 
of You know what? Much more useful is the other lesson there. 
It’s senseless, he teaches, to place new patches on the ripped 
junk—unsightly. And in addition, why would You tear apart 
what is whole? Well, this—this is about us, this we understand. 
But, honestly, even that really is of no use; after all, is there anythin new among these tatters of ours? And there was one more 
incident.  A  sower  was,  supposedly,  sowin.  It’s  not  clear 
where—on the Fallows, on Lazarus Field, or by Granny’s 
Cross. And this also happened: One beggar woman met the 
Wintry Man in the woods and from fright Kondraty caught 
her. Gradually, they found her. The raven pecked her eyes out, 
worms ate the mushrooms in her basket, and the pines stand 
around as they stood before, until they’ll burn. So they placed 
on that clearin a memorial cross. And the sower threw one 
grain next to the road, dropped the second on rocky ground, 
the third into the thorns, and only the fourth he managed to 
plant more or less successfully. All told, a gyrfalcon grasped 
one grain, a kite the second, and a quail the third. And what did 
You think? Whether they want to or not, they need to take care 
of nourishment. However, the fourth grain managed to make it 
and produced, out of the blue, an immeasurable crop—a hundred grains. I read for a while the hunter’s book and realized: 
Everythin will get milled over. Don’t worry, the constellation 
Pozhilykh can be seen among us too. Lookin from below, You 
are positioned two elbows above the Wintry Man’s star. You 
resemble a handful of fireflies. And he glows in the darkness 
like a large shiner, even though, upon verification, he’s a squirt. 
The given warden as a person is of ordinary age, but as himself, 
he’s visible, noticeable. Smallpox slightly changed his portrait, 
then—the hunt marked him with shot, the frost and wine 
burned his nose, and a rabid fox bit off his ear: We can understand that granny. I see—now the Wintry Man is drivin his 
spouse to perish; he could not take it anymore. My Sharpenhauers with Gury the gameslayer on the outskirts started 
smokin, they’re talkin, and Ilya Dzynzyrella in a far-off work 
location told the elder sister: I desire your mussels, gimme as 
many as you can, salt and matches are present. Dusk’s everywhere; evenin’s everywhere; Itil’s all over. But there, where the 
Wintry Man is squeakin with his carriage—fall descended 
from heavens, at my colleagues’ place, in Gorodnishche—a 
snowstorm began, and on my Wolf River—orioles and woodpeckers. I do what the elder sister orders and step up to my 
knees into the wave. I stuff my shoulder bag to the gills and set 
a small fire. I can hear—the masters are buzzin in December at 
the foot of the hill. They are talkin mainly about Pyotr; the 
grinders ain’t sure what’s goin on with him. He, Yegor, returned 
then to the sitters on the spit and told them that after that dame 
there is nothin to break the clouds in his existens; he may as 
well hang himself. They started cheerin him up: You’ll always 
have time to hang yourself, better let’s chat. Well, if you wanna 
chat, let’s chat, Pyotr, adamant, agreed right away. Do you 
know the village Overbrowears? Yes, I do, a sawmill is workin 
there, supposedly. Right, so let’s wager a bet that you won’t lift 
from there even one baluster, and even if you lift it, you’ll be 
too sissy to choke on it, you won’t have the guts, it’s doubtful, 
let’s say, you won’t gag on it, you’ll pass, you’ll chicken out, etc. 
That’s what the sitters told Pyotr on the spit, that’s what they, 
the sitters, kept sayin to Fyodor, and Ilya is gettin ready for supper, he’s fryin the mussels on the coals. The breeze has calmed 
down, the ripples on the water and on my soul have settled 
completely, and the nightingale in adder’s tongue is spinnin 
cock-and-bull stories. Well, they’re talkin about the sawmill 
and I about the factory. I heard a voice: Keep in mind that in 
the comin future they will establish a factory at the mouth of 
the stream Slush, and not of any kind, just so, but to make buttons. When they establish it, when it gets goin, and when it 
begins makin buttons, everybody will start walkin buttoned to 
the hilt. And they will need mother-of-pearl aplenty—just 
keep draggin it in. So they will open next to the factory a point, 
not of honin skates to a point but a collection point, and they’ll 
start collectin mussels from the populace of the entire land ’cuz 
quite a lot of mother-of-pearl is hidin in them. And to the one 
who deposits more useful stuff than the others, the factory will 
present a dory. I’m tellin You as it is, I heard the voice: Don’t be 
lazy, collect the treasures. I wandered a lot and ate many suppers, and how many mussels I laid bare, no one can count. I hid 
a mass of the empty folds, cleverly fashioned in the manner of 
beggars’ palms, the priceless folds, dull at the bottom. I was 
hidin them openly, spreadin them on the ground ’cuz the thing 
lyin in plain sight is lyin there hidden better than anythin. 
Therefore, You, after learnin the secret, stay away, don’t You 
debit my pearls, else You shall find You know what. Well, if You 
wanna turn them around in Your hands, go on, turn, I will not 
forbid You, but after You’ve turned them, put them back where 
You found them, otherwise it’ll end up that *Carl stole from 
Clara a coral tiara*. I request this to be announced like an order, 
so they comply; after all, they’re all chimney pots first-class. 
And they got into a habit of convertin them all into ashtrays. 
Enough, a certain day, You know, will come. The moment I notice that the barges with woodcutters float by to saw timber, I 
grab a sack as capacious and as intact as possible and scurry at 
a brisk clip around the beevaks of the bygone feasts. I collect 
them, deliver to the address, and the boat is mine. Not too 
shabby a dory, everybody will comment, Ilya had procured for 
himself, not just so-so. And what did You think, I will say, You 
assumed that I am a blockhead, a numskull? You hoped that 
the grinder has mush in his stockpot? No, enviers, no, freeloaders, I only look like a dude without all his marbles, only pretend to snuggle with manure. A bright future will begin for me 
with my personal dinghy. That’s when we, passionate mushroom pickers, will get into a habit of goin after forest berries 
there, Beyond the Wolf. And even though I am invitin You cordially, there’s tension about transportation. Nevertheless, I believe, someday we will get even to the other side; let’s just work 
out a short delay. I repeat, get Yourself—hook or crook—some 
gummies, ’cuz to have the ankels stung by the nettles in the 
hollows is just a nuisance, but there are also vipers hidin in gullies. Yes, and grab a raincoat in case of unexpected rain. Be well, 
my gangly friend in a mackintosh and a cap, climb in, the stern 
has been longin after You. I already spread there some mint, 
lungwort, and hemlock so it would smell nice, to get rid of the 
unwanted odor. And we finally cast off, banterin. And more 
precisely, at the last moment You started whinin, refused to 
go—and I set out alone. I set out to gallivant in my first-rate 
hazel groves, bequeeted to me one fall by a certain old-timer. 
He bequeeted them, showed me, and before spring chose to 
join the dead. But the hazel groves are really tiptop, in each 
cluster there are more nuts than a homeless goat has, not to 
offend her, dingleberries under her tail. True, to my shame, afterward I had not visited this real estate of mine even once. 
What a tale, why would I not go there anymore in the co-op’s 
dory? ’Cuz we had drunk the co-op’s vessel away usin the coop’s method about twenty-five times. It’s as simple as steamin 
turnips, but it allows us to launch all kinds of provisions or 
foodstuffs more than once. Every now and then, there is no 
money: No problem, it’s their business, but there is a cat. Obviously, not ours, the grinders’; we don’t need it; so far, mice 
don’t munch on iron; the miller, You see, has a cat. And one of 
our loafers pretends to be a wandrin cripple and goes to the 
miller on the hill: What village do You have here? Don’t take it 
amiss, he says, it’s Malokulebyakovo. And I thought that it 
would be Mylomukomolovo. No, Mykomulolomovo is an old 
song, we were called Mykomulolomovo long ago. Hmm, and 
where is Milokurelemovo in this case? Malokulelemovo, quoth 
he, is in a completely different location, mallow we never  
kulelemed. And while they talk all this nonsense, our slickers 
with a sack keep their watch for the cat behind the barn. The 
miller calls on a foggy dawn his Siberian angora, wanders, thunderous, along the Itil, but the cat’s far away. Get it together, 
dunderhead, the culprits will release it into good hands. And 
right away a new shift rolls up its sleeves. I believe the co-workers 
won’t lemme down and will remove the mouser from the buyer 
in the same way. A similar brouhaha could be observed with 
the dory. I can’t say now from whom we had pilfered it first, the 
event is too distant, and it’s not really important. I’ll only note 
that later we floated it many times and regularly and also always without fail to those who understood the deal. At the 
end, however, we  failed, brought shame on  ourselves; we 
passed it to one quite irresponsible. Havin finished the transaction, after the sunset, we appear like thieves under the cover of 
the night around the riverside dock, where, accordin to the 
forcast information, that fellow was plannin to keep our scow. 
We look—there’s no flat-bottom boat, only a pile of splinters 
lies nearby. It becomes clear: Right when we were bargainin 
with the poor wretch, someone cleaned up his bathhouse. 
They took the basket, the scrubber, a sliver of soap, and the 
beaker. And in addition they pulled out the net from the stream 
’cuz that bathhouse was near the stream. The wardens did it, no 
doubt about it. And when the buyer arrived home in his new 
purchase and discovered the loss, he started shakin all over. 
Why are you laughin?—asked some Cheremis folks that sat 
not far from there, beltin the grape—What’s so funny? How 
can I not laugh, answered this Vasya—’cuz it was he. How can 
I not laugh, he answered; I saw among the damages of fate the 
single singular ray of light—the trap net full of holes—and I 
dreamed of becomin a fisherman, I wanted to buy a dory. And 
observe: Either the dory is *uke* and the net *e-e*, or the dory *e-e* 
and the net *uke*, got stolen. No, Micheas the Morasthite taught 
wrong that everyone setteth a net for his brother; here we have 
a different picture: You, brother, set a net and your bro absconds with it. And so Vasily findeth an ax and heweth our craft 
due to its uselessness, rejoicin in his heart. And this way we 
became boatless in our nunset years, we utterly lost our craft 
usin our co-op’s method. So how can I, he says, not be laughin?


And yet, Fomich, let’s assume that You and I managed to get 
a rowboat. We prepared, got hold of the gummies, the basket, 
and the raincoat, and what is typical—I set off and You abstained. I started worryin: Did You catch the flu, are You sick? 
No, the health fits the norm, simply some work-related problems 
showed up—I’m in a hurry to get familiar with Your letter, so 
my mushrooms, unfortunately, will have to wait. Truth’s on Your 
side, a bird in the hand is better than two in the bush, get familiar, 
generously raise my hopes. I pushed off with the usual—and like 
a harmless water strider started measurin the wide-open space 
with my jerks. The rowlocks are cryin exactly like lapwings, 
they’re not oiled at all. Did You notice what weather we’re havin? 
Pure delight, superior to the previous. It would be great to grab 
from You on this occasion a couple of smokes, and put the first 
between my teeth, the second behind my ear for later. Impossible beauty. The old pine forest is red; the woods are like a fox 
with burn marks; the Itil flows like a pearly honey, you can eat 
it with a spoon. And the water is translucent, like in the moonlight, and millions-gazillions of empties lie on the bottom, and 
you can read with ease any label stuck on them, as if thru the 
counter’s glass. I could dive, gather the disowned vessels—and 
right away to Sloboda. Eh? Calm down, these are all silly dreams, 
it’s enormously deep, and, in general, we’re not divers. In contrast, for leeches it’s accessible—they keep suckin. And where 
are the crucians, that is, the ruffs? I looked carefully—they 
were snoozin in the holes, in the shadow of the banks, under 
the tree roots, and Orina was swimmin above me, spreadin her 
thighs completely like a frog. She was swimmin on the surface 
like in a mirror, as if temptin, and her long hair was draggin like 
algae along her sides and spine, and her breasts—to be honest—
were movin like a pair of large tenches among other fishes. From 
my distant nearby I could without any pangs of conscience get 
impressions from the woman, and I was inspectin her all, as long 
as I had enough air, and when I did not, I would come up, take a 
few breaths, and back. With her saucy figure she was teasin geese 
in Ilya on purpose, but I held my temper in check, not givin amnesty to my nerves, and proudly kept my patience—keep teasin, 
keep teasin, we, the orphans, don’t need to get used to it, we can 
bear it. But keep in mind: When my cravins get too strong due 
to long prayers, I will force you, snub nose, in every possible way 
and then, a kinless worm, I will shamelessly warm up the stick of 
my flesh, I will ride you good and proper. And as for the mussels, 
they were also there, scattered all over. Some were just lyin simply 
scattered, reflectin the light, and the others were creepin along accurately, who knows where, and were leavin on the pliable, loose 
ground such tracks as if the crawlin Gorynych had made them, 
very thin. Matches and salt, You are hintin, did I have with me? 
Not entirely: Among the other special items, they were located 
in my clothes, and they, in turn, in scabiosas, in thick bushes. Before my maimin, and even later—up to that lonesome babe that 
stitched all my cylinders dead shot, so I wouldn’t aimlessly poke 
with my hands in my pockets—preservin the customs of my 
ancestors, I kept all my possessions there. Nowadays, I pack my 
stuff partially in my bag and partially into an empty tied-up pant 
leg—comfort. They say that unhappiness leads to happiness, but 
mine surely didn’t. That’s it. What I had predicted for Orina in 
my mind, did happen. I visit her on the same date in July, You 
understand, on the twentieth accordin to the Old Style, it’s Ilya’s 
name day and her day off for overtime. No sense to sit inside—
let’s go and have some fun. Time—close to five. Its weak, gentle 
air was gettin cooler, but the frogs, what the heck, started croakin 
like insane, they sensed my mood. I had with me fourteen rubles 
in change; I collected them at the station in the mornin. Out of 
that, just under the platform I found about a ruble—our passenger is still a loser. And all in all, it’s wonderful under the platform, cozy—you smoke, cough, and nobody gives a spit where 
you are and, perhaps, who. In contrast, thru the cracks between 
the boards you can be curious and observe everythin perfectly: 
For instance, some ladies for some reason don’t wear undies at 
all. Well, so Orina took an advance a day earlier—have yourself a blast. There was, existed, in those tricky years like years, 
a joint—not a joint, a shop—not a shop, and properly speakin, 
a snack bar. It was located a stone’s throw from the barracks, 
more than close; it was gapin with its window frames at the road. 
We got supplies and found a quiet spot behind the dike, among 
the acacias, in the midst of lady’s smocks. For Orya, accordin to 
not our custom, I spread down my jacket, and myself—simply 
like that. We had a bite: dried Azov sea roach, third quality—
even now it stands in front of my eyes. We sang, chanted, and 
then I quoted her from memory a few racy adventures. And 
it was gettin overcast, the storm was approachin from the reservoir, and I started regrettin my ploy, ’cuz the croakers made 
us sick and tired—completely sick and tired with their loud 
chorus. I considered turnin the clouds back, but laziness overwhelmed me, I got sauced up and feeble. God be with it, I am 
thinkin, let the hidden water in the clouds thunder, perhaps it’ll 
pass by. But no, it started pourin. It caught us on the meadow, 
by the swings. Everythin turned gloomy, started shakin, drippin. Let’s run, she hurries. And drags me to the shore. An overturned abandoned scow was lyin there on the pebbles upside 
down and a short slingshot supported its rim, makin it possible 
to get under. The matches got wet, but a flint stone and steel 
did not refuse—I set the punk on fire in a flash. Dry crumbly 
splinters and used mouthpieces from *papirosy*, and all kinds 
of flammable trifles I found in excess, so the fire started right 
away. The light wonderfully illuminated Orina, and it also lit 
Ilya up, and our shadows started crawlin along the coarse boat 
sides. Bugbear’s walkin, full of life, carries seven slippers: for 
himself, for his wife, and a slipper for each nipper, I remember 
tellin her. The gusher scratches and scrapes the planks, but we 
are dry, we are talkin and restin on the old junk. You revealed 
to me your life stories, my friend says to me, so if you want—
I will also tell you a few things.