---
chapter-number: "09"
title: Pictures from an Exhibition
language: en
---

A friend of the family, a courier clerk, whose ancestors, Sicilian negotiators, once arrived in Russia for 
a shipment of tarantassi and, on their way back, got 
stuck forever in the impassable mud somewhere between 
Konotop and Syzran, and whose portrait shines by its absence 
in the exposition, shows interest in our hero. When the latter, 
in the words of the first, reaches the required level of respectability, the public servant advises the young man to follow in 
his footsteps and through his protection makes it possible for 
him to enroll in the courier institute. The fate of the artist had 
been decided. His face, possessing features of refined sensuality, attracted attention by its clear expression of character. Particularly during parades and reviews. Particularly equine ones. 
In those moments, he would become twice as energetic and 
proud. In contrast, the physiognomies of the remaining riders 
were mediocre; the ears of many, seemingly in order to catch 
the clatter of the hooves better, were hopelessly sticking out. 
From the windows of the classroom every hour—a river cesspool, and often the enthusiastic youngster dares to sail on it in 
a monstrous trough. How obtrusively paper and slime drag 
after the blades of oars! Yanko is not afraid of the wind or waves; 
when he grows up, he will appear in the twilight of his life as a 
master cook in the cooking joint slippery from grease. Methodical stirring with a ladle and whirling of foul-smelling slop 
will suddenly vividly resemble the pictures from the carefree 
past, from the period of lonely boat races with himself—feverish and frail—when in the morning, the mugs of the neighboring buildings, yawning in the dirty-yellow hospital dankness of 
the outskirts’ fogs, make you feel faint and when that—true, 
pockmarked, and rotten-toothed—girl behind the plywood 
partition, setting out to her defectological universities, snivels 
about her school-writing accessories that scattered all over the 
floor, and sings without a tune and without end: Rain, dear rain, 
please be done, I will go to Arestan—eleven years old, harelipped, conceived in a drunken stupor—and you, at the dawn 
of your deprived youth, are waking up, covered with peels and 
petals of whitewash dropping from the ceiling, you’re waking 
up, trying to understand: Is it you or someone else waking up 
right there, and not knowing: Is it he or someone else, for instance—precisely you, but also a neglected weakling who is 
waking up here, doomed to miseries of the anemic day, while 
mother rustles with a newspaper, swooshes with her coat, 
scratches with the key, and goes out to become an accountant 
in the haberdashery named after the politician Razin: Stepan 
Timofeevich, where the heck did you put the ledger? And 
meanwhile, a poorly cut, yet solidly sewn dashing military instructor in suspenders, having beforehand dressed the chair in 
an impeccably ironed French coat, walked among the courier 
machines typical for the years of the campaign. He was arriving 
bright-faced, ruddy like all guardsmen, with a couple of fearless, seemingly filled with terror, ashen bulging eyes. *Portrait of 
a Military Instructor*. He walked with narrow, laden steps, and, 
dropping morsels of Morse code, announced that the first use 
of a tank in battle took place during the Indian summer of 1916 
on the Bzura. *War*. The air is gray, listless, and serene. Rain fell 
a day before; the sleepy front-line plants are slowly stripping. 
And when the gunfire calms down, one can hear how the stiff 
and heavy leaves of the oak tree in the grove fall, nose-diving, 
and the crows chatter in the same grove on the hill, marked on 
topographical maps as number two hundred seventeen. Besides that, one can hear that in the sawmill someone is sawing 
with a saw and someone is screeching on a concertina. And in 
the trenches and ditches of the enemy, beyond the tangled, terribly corroded barbed wires, beyond the small pile of motley, 
multinational, bare-toothed, and barefooted corpses, the Austrian flutes, in counterpoint with the Magyar drums, whistle 
the annoying “Kaiser’s Hunting March,” utterly alien to the 
Russian heart. In one word, toward winter the view from the 
classroom’s window becomes too repetitive. And it is apparent 
that the more you study it, the more static it gets. And does not 
every *Homo sapiens* that is hurrying somewhere resemble 
Achilles? Nobody is able to catch up with one’s tortoise, reach 
something close by, whatever it could be. A survey of the late 
fall. Occupation—a passerby. Place of work—the street. The 
length of employment in the given field—eternity. The situation is not better with the other moving objects—they are not 
moving, making everything questionable. The migration of 
flocks lasts unacceptably long. They soar above the ribbed, 
dark maroon roofs, barely waving their wings. There is a wind 
orchestra in the park, but on the benches—many free seats. 
Naturally, the sound is flowing as if the gramophone completely lost its breath. Let it be so. The same about movement 
of every kind; more precisely—non-movement, about the 
static character of the entire *Winter’s Eve in the City*: Let it be 
so. Literature lessons were going on. The shoes of the teacher, 
on which, like a pair of used-up lonely accordions, descended 
the socks, were unusually worn out, they were wrecked. It 
seemed you were looking at the footwear of an inveterate 
walker, an enthusiastic pilgrim, a wandering cripple, and perhaps even the very Ahasuerus—the celebrated shoemaker 
without a shoe shop, the one who gained world fame by his 
impulsiveness, and who admitted his mistake but still got what 
he deserved. And yet, as for the static character of the winter’s 
eve in the city: Let it be so. But unexpectedly on the screen of 
the window unfolded the black-and-white silent movie of *The 
First Snowfall* and if the street until now has not offered to the 
downcast eyes any energetic subjects, be so kind and find 
them, display them, imagine them for yourself, and project 
them on the screen without delay. Here are for you newspaper 
boys in once-fashionable plaid kepi, shouting out sensational 
headlines. Much obliged, but you are not taking into account 
that sensations have been officially banned, these boys have retired, and the newspapers are sold only in kiosks. In that case, 
show the former boys that now turned into a living embodiment of untreatable illnesses, and as far as sensations—
because of the lack of the present ones—collect yesterday’s. 
Here they are, the little devils, rushing down the bridge along 
the cast-iron Imperial railings with eagles, trying to peddle to 
the encountered Achilleses the so-called fresh issues. By the 
way, rushing is a strong word; however, in comparison with the 
Achilleses, they are almost rushing. And notice that some of 
them are traveling on invalids’ carts, and one had already been 
dressed for the last journey: The oaken burden had been placed 
on runners, and the co-workers of the deceased are dragging it 
over the fresh powder. How do you find their faces? They are 
worn out. Did time have no mercy on them? Absolutely not. 
Well, and their souls? Alas, their souls are maimed beyond recognition, simply not worth a broken farthing. The march of 
gloomy subjects with the fangs yellow from acorn coffee in 
their wrinkled mouths, carrying under their arms bundles of 
sheets yellowed by spite and false accusations, convulsing like 
Saint Vitus and maliciously grimacing, was making the mercantile move along the route of the A-tram. The so-called white 
flies were swarming above the peddlers, blinding them, tickling their blackhead-covered, overripe noses, and sticking to 
their shoulders like dandruff. The distributors kept tripping on 
the bumpy ground, falling, struggling, spilling their cargo, and, 
to collect it, crawling on all fours with a guilty look. After all, 
they were very heavy, these dirt-cheap bundles. But perhaps 
they were not newspapers at all, perhaps the retirees carried for 
sale histories of their illnesses—such heavy ones—of such serious ones? No, no, these were exactly newspapers—histories 
of the illnesses of history—such heavy ones—of such serious 
ones, and the histories of their own illnesses the paper boys 
carried inside; they were themselves histories of these diseases. 
Poor codgers, for a long time they were unable to conquer the 
barely noticeable hump in the pavement—black ice! Almost 
reaching the summit, the co-workers, one after another, slid 
down holding their historical load, and some of them managed 
to keep staying on their feet, while the others did not. After sliding down to the bottom, they undertook the new ascent and 
slid again—Sisyphus after Sisyphus: What fun! And now provide the sound. Fine, catch it! First, whizzing and moaning, 
asthmatic cough, shuffling of footwear, clearing of throats, sobbing, etc. After that, someone who lost something yells: So 
where is my something? In response—silence, everybody is 
too busy, everybody is captivated by the process of movement; 
it is a procession. The procedure of dragging the improvised 
catafalque—the sounds of the dragging. A shout: Fresh news! 
A scream: *Russian Gazette!* Then all at once, but different 
things: *The Voice! New Times! Stock Exchange Circular! St. 
Petersburg Leaflet!* Panting with pneumatic braking mechanisms, the streetcar catches up with and passes the presssellers, and the bustling mumble of the twelve pairs of wheels, 
even though its sounds are muted by the snow flurries, deafens 
this dissonant roar. Finally, the last car showed the veterans its 
oval-shaped cockroach butt, with a protruding and swinging 
sausage of the turnbuckle, with the letter A, walking in agronomist’s arshin-wide steps, and with moping human mugs behind the dull round windows of the car’s vestibule. The clock 
above the gate of the park of cultural recreation was attesting to 
the most boring stretch of the day—the spades trumped one 
o’clock and made a lead to two. Night visited Japan, and karatekas of Hokkaido, having shouted enough “Ha,” wallowed on 
their tatami. In China, dogs’ heads were being cut off. Turkey 
smelled of coffee and tobacco. In Albania, despite the earthquake, by the house of the patriot Kastrioti, a mob of dark- 
complexioned gawkers rejoiced. Romania was curing its hangover with Rymnikskoye wine, legs were becoming light and 
went dancing by themselves, and nobody knew whether it is 
Tuesday or Thursday. The unemployed Italy merrily rode under the olive trees on stolen velocycles, and the lira, as always, 
was not worth a spit. Lighthouses and sirens of Gibraltar heartened seafarers riding out a storm, and here, in Russia, in the 
former merry village Botfortovo, the retired newspaper tomboys attempted to get rid of retired news. Meeting of the Emperors in Holstein! Bashi-bazouks slaughtered fifteen thousand in Bulgaria! All is calm on Shipka! Trans-Siberian railroad 
finished! Tsai Hsun condemned to hara-kiri! Evacuation in 
Manchuria! Incident in Casablanca! Go out—willy-nilly, with 
a heavy soul, tumbleweed rolls freely and jumps like a ball, dictated Ahasuerus. The pens worked diligently. Parcae and 
Moirae condemned the students to courier life, and in front of 
them were all the riches of the world. It was getting light. In 
Lapland the cows had not been milked yet, in Nazareth the 
muezzin had not cried out yet, but in the hunting cottage of the 
French king, revelers were still drinking Chartreuse. Having 
finished prattling about the courtesans and balls, they stumbled out with their goblets on the balcony and, grabbing the 
horn from each other’s hands, bellowed to the stars a complaint of the young bull killed at the Catalan corrida. Afterward, they shot into the air: The shots were heard as far as Versailles. The borzois there were nervous and barked from time 
to time; the guards kept shuddering and waking up. Fräuleins 
in peignoirs and with night lamps in their hands gossiped in 
the galleries: Oh, *mon Dieu*, when will he finally settle down—
*monarque*, but behaves like Pierrot. Friends, the one mentioned announces, standing close to the balustrade, surrounded 
by the cortege and the dog pack, I propose a toast to this daredevil who will empty in one gulp the barrel of my musket, filled 
with Burgundy. The weapon is brought out. Its butt is richly 
inlaid. The host puts it in the hands of one of the participants: 
Give it a try, *mon cher*. A failure befalls the Graf; he is unable to 
drink even a half. The barrel is refilled and, to the accompaniment of the hunters’ laughter, given to the next of them. He 
also suffers a fiasco. The musket is moving in a circle and the 
circle, finally, closes—only the first among equals has not yet 
tested his skill. Frenchmen, he says, your benevolent Ludovic 
is hastening to your rescue. Right now he will empty the vessel, 
although in a manner completely different than yours—just 
watch. The monarch plugs the barrel with a cork and pours 
some Dutch powder on the flashpan. Deathly pallor covers the 
faces of those present. Your—they scream in terror, moving to 
the sides; the king shoots (the musket explodes) and falls 
down; everybody anxiously runs to the outstretched body—
Highness! Ludovic is silent, his wonderful visage, painted hundreds of times by European masters, is disfigured and the snowwhite masquerade costume—completely bespattered. Ah, my 
little boy, whispers the queen who woke up for a moment in 
her boudoir from the distant gunshot that reminded her of a 
pop of a carnival popgun, my sweet mischief-maker. The white 
curls of the beautiful hair of Her Majesty are spread over her 
high-piled pillows; she is having a sad dream: A brazen boar 
with the physiognomy of the hunchbacked whipper-in, whom 
she despises, rapturously caresses her in the shadow of the camellias next to the baths. Having accomplished the evil deed, 
the lascivious game vanishes in the thicket. Shame and disgust 
seize the queen. She has a feeling that some of the wardens that 
were hiding in the gazebo and were the clandestine witnesses 
of the indecent scene, would want to make fun of her most august disgrace. It was getting light. The investigator for special 
cases, Pozhilykh, a specialist without any kind of special identifying marks, wore a convertible coat-tent and a field bag 
across his shoulder. In the bag—standard document blanks, a 
tightly rolled-up saber sheath, a pocket flashlight, a measuring 
tape, a magnifying glass, a fountain pen, a detailed map of the 
area, and an eyeglass holder, in which, beneath the lining, lies a 
photograph of the female worker of the local public library that 
holds in its collection about a hundred grayish volumes. *Pozhilykh’s Sunday*. Supper, vermouth, clouds of smoke. Tobacco is 
moist and has a combined aftertaste of cologne and kerosene—a result of carelessness of those responsible for packaging, storing, and shipping. Eyes are drawn to scrambled eggs 
with sausage, *laberdan*, and a can of very salty Caspian sardines. 
One can distinguish the month of the catch and the day of salting, one can also read the Turkic signature of the controller. 
Among furniture, besides chairs and a table, there is a settee, 
narrow and uncomfortable in every respect. And a simple 
sideboard—made of walnut. On the shelves—a few plates and 
saucers and a few slightly moldy pieces of bread. One can also 
notice there a container with office glue—to seal the windows. 
Cut the paper strips from the newspaper margins, and glue 
them on before the first frosts. The view from one of the inspector’s windows reveals a wooden shed, full of cracks; the view 
from the other—the same shed. In summer, when the window 
frames are wide open, there is a smell of honeysuckle and elder, 
the aroma of chopped wood, and the sounds of a shaded side 
street—a fly, a moped, a tarantas, and the steps of a resident. Being a representative of the office of the prosecutor, Pozhilykh lies 
down around ten. He reads in bed a journal published in the capital, not shirking verses and poems, and frequently reciting from 
memory what sank in, what he remembers. Particularly—*As I 
Drove Up to Izhory*. Moreover, he imagines Izhory as a large 
wooden town on a hill in the middle of a spacious parched pasture. Across the field, orange-tinted like a pumpkin, under the 
pleasant sky of a not very warm midday, rolls the dormeuse with 
crude shock absorbers made from forged iron. The passenger, 
dark-skinned and lively, with carelessly combed curly sideburns, 
leans out and, gently holding his top hat with his hand, engages 
in recollections: I remembered our story, glances of your dark 
blue eyes. Izhory is getting closer and the golden cupolas keep 
gleaming. In case of a trip beyond the boundaries of the district, 
especially if in the pearly dampness of the mist, brightly glowing, 
soars a trace of a strange deceit, or it is just cold, he puts on a 
wind-shielding padded jacket and a felt cloak of solid construction. Having spent the night, he gives an order to harness the 
horses, and right away. Clinking is heard, it is getting light. Eh, I 
will give you a ride over the bumps, the driver with eyes resembling the rabbit’s, in a fox-skin coat, rapaciously baring teeth in his 
wolf’s muzzle, winks from the driver’s bench. And it is true—the 
road is not blacktopped. On the right, one and a half or maybe 
even more *verstas* away—there is a river. Beyond the river—a village with many bathhouses and boats on the shore. The church is 
fully reflected. Reflected are also the crows, swarming around the 
belfry like black pieces of fabric cut by a tailor and lifted up by the 
zephyr. The given village, if one were to trust the maps, has a long 
and senseless name. One can hear in it the whirring movement of 
a mill’s grinding wheel; it seems to wave from afar the quadriga of 
its wings, not aware of their other, lofty purpose. One can also 
hear the sounds of loading; tapping with their boots and grunting on the entire middle of August, some laborers are carrying 
whitish five-pood bundles and order the one standing on the 
wagon: Here, grab them! He truly scrambles. In addition, 
in the given name glimmers the speech impairment of the 
miller’s helper, a dimwit and spindle-legs, who, answering your 
question—What village is this?—says nothing, only keeps 
sucking a lollipop on a stick and, as if nothing happened, turns 
into ice your visiting soul with the stare practiced around Izhory. 
For a musical ear, our name reverberates with the entire symphony; after all, one can also discover in it the voice of the miller 
himself who, having heard the above-mentioned conversation, 
hurries to provide assistance—if we can only say such a thing 
about a person who barely walks, being burdened by the overabundance of health—hurries to assist the one with the speech 
impairment. But the miller himself also seems to have stuffed his 
mouth with something—most likely with some millstones, because the grains of his words are pouring on the traveler with the 
flour of noise. And it does not help that in a moment the hallowed 
name will flash in the fog: To determine clearly—is it Malokulebyakovo or Mylokulelemovo—there is not enough perspicacity.