---
chapter-number: "10"
title: Dzynzyrella's
language: en
---

Well, she says, as a rule, I live all the time in the 
barracks here. We have a cozy park, with swings, 
the residents are also quite friendly, and there is 
a ravine—walk to your heart’s content. Earlier a certain granny, 
the old ragpicker, shared quarters with me. She smelled of old 
stuff worser than you do, and I was only gettin into prime, my 
hands, fittin my years, smelled of milk, my hair was wavy, curly. 
And I wanted to walk; I’ll go out and walk all day. On the glades 
it is pleasant—magpies, rooks. When they fly up—half of the 
sky is gone. And don’t leave nothin shiny—they’ll steal it. 
Sometimes I would shout: Shoo from my money! I used to 
pick large dandelions, collect clover for food; after all, fate did 
not spoil me with sweets. And once a trapper captured a fox 
cub, what a joy! And he predicted: When it grows up it’ll be a 
fox. But not long the fox cub stayed with us—it got lost. 
I searched in the woods—there’s no fox, what pity, what sadness. Later we went with Granny to search for wasted coal on 
the railroad embankment. We have to fire our stove, the fall is 
comin. The gray slag from locomotives, Orina tells me, as if I 
never searched for it myself, the gray slag from locomotives 
they throw out, and in the gray there is black, what didn’t burn 
away; you noticed it—pick it up and that’s it. And we found the 
fox on the rails, sliced up. Apparently some strangers caught it 
and tied it with twine to its doom. Woe is the fox, it perished, 
sharp teeth, very long tail. And Granny: Don’t wail now, this 
ain’t ours, ours was smaller; let’s better pull the skin off. No, 
Granny, don’t pretend, it’s ours, it grew up in summer. And the 
trapper later asks about the fox. But I hid the truth. The trapper 
was our neybor, but I wasn’t goin out with him. At first, I was 
goin alone, with nobody. But, after all, age takes its toll and a 
young sailor turned my head: Jokin aside, what’s there to fear, 
he says. What do you think, he finally got what he wanted. At 
the very beginnin, quietly—he kept touchin, snugglin. His 
mouth was so sweet. I am laughin: What, did you munch some 
fruit drops? And the sailor: I always use them—you know, we 
need to get rid of the tobacco odor, otherwise our commander 
will give us hell, we’re not allowed to smoke, we’re underage. 
When we return to our craft from a furlow, he arranges inspections: Well, cadets, breathe, he demands, right away. Other fellows buy mints in the boat’s apothecary, but in my opinion 
fruit drops are more useful, although so far my teeth are not 
too good, I grew up in evacuation, around Chistopol, so they’re 
all completely rotten, but then from mints a blister bursts just 
like that on your tongue, and fruit drops you chew your entire 
way back—and no worries. You can also chew tea or coffee 
beans, only the packaged tea in your pocket will spill out for 
sure and when the commander starts turnin your pockets inside out, he’ll decide it’s tobacco, and you won’t prove that it’s 
tea, and if you do prove it—that’s another minus: After all, tea 
can also be smoked and it can be turned into a strong brew, so 
with tea you’ll get burned in both cases, and with coffee too. 
No, honestly, fruit drops are more reliable than everythin else, 
no snags, and to hell with these cavities, if you think about it, 
the main thing is, the nerves are worth more. And will you 
gimme some? If you agree, he said, the entire tin is yours. And 
I wasn’t spoiled by sweets. So he led me, obviously, ashore, and 
dragged me under the boat here, but I am still not trustin him 
too much. Then he lit a cigarette and is gettin ready to burn the 
skin on my stomach. So what was I to do, I would have not 
done it with him otherwise. He was puny though, Ilyusha, punier than you. Probably Chistopol was showin, but we haven’t 
slept a wink all the same. We got out when it was already grayish, and when we started I could still see through the entry gap 
his trainin gunboat in the middle: We are at the roadstead, he 
bragged. The boat looked all dark gray, and the gun—in the 
sack. And it was windy—waves, splatter. At home Granny met 
me and started reamin me out, she splattered the fruit drops all 
over the floor. Well, so after that I haven’t said no to the youngster no more. One day he shows up—he’s wearin a pea jacket: 
You see, what lousy weather, finito. So you won’t visit after 
this? No, I’ll drop in when spring comes, he says, why would I 
traipse over snowdrifts senselessly, and Granny, he hints, will 
not allow us to do it in the room, and under the dinghy it’s almost unthinkable, packed with snow, so all the very best to you 
until later. And a certain man lived then in the neyborin barrack, did handicrafts, had a room under the stairs, and smelled 
of leather and wax. There’s more in store—Granny gives me 
the fox’s hide: Here, take it over there, perhaps this chap will 
stitch you soft loafers for free. Why not, I can stitch them, he 
said, but for free, for *mersi*, so far, nothin’s done here. When he 
started takin measurements of my foot, he locked the door 
right away, put the hook in—and you know what. Drop in for 
fittins, he instructed, and I started comin often to them fittins. 
He had stitched nice mocs in January; for strength he applied 
the vamps, for looks he edged them with the fox’s tail—not 
bad. It was comfy to walk in them along the piles of blown 
snow to visit him, softer than soft. And toward the spring—I’m 
already in the family way. And you cannot keep the cat in the 
bag forever—right?—so in the barracks they started all kind of 
gossip. Granny lamented: Every hour somethin worse, she 
said, our Orina liked to walk and became a streetwalker, just 
wait what will happen next, she kept worryin. And along the 
fresh grass, the sailor boy—ahoy—calls again under the scow; 
he hauled there a bunch of old junk from the ship. And it so 
happened that in the mornin I am with the handyman, and at 
sunset I hurry to the river shore. And I got so used to it, so into 
it, that if one or two days go by without the usual—then I’m in 
trouble, I squirm, languish inwardly, as if a piece of ice was 
burnin inside me. You’re turnin into a pro, the sailor suggested. 
Do you mind if on the weekend I bring a pal with me? And two 
of them arranged their visits, but even together they could not 
keep up with me. But then, suddenly, they got a big leave from 
the gunboat—the order was given—and they presented me 
with four. I started protestin, I won’t manage with all, and I did 
not like the way the new ones talked; if you listened, they 
seemed awfully crude about everythin. And then they purposely pretended that there will be only two of them at a time, 
like usual, and their friends will wait close by. But when he and 
his pal in one pair have finished gratin me, then they whistle on 
the other two wooers. I understood my predicament—decided 
to get rid of them, but again only threw my words to the wind. 
That’s how they tricked me and in addition got me all bruised 
up. We’ve got ourselves a swell discharge, one of them esplained later, otherwise you wander like a homeless pup, don’t 
know where to go; after all, we ain’t locals, acquaintances—
zilch, and we’ve got to kill time, we’re young, after all. Well, we 
can drop in to the barber to make ourselves spic-and-span, or 
to the Armenian to get our shoes buffed squeaky-clean, to 
change the laces, or to the movies, or to the skatin rink in the 
worst case. But the skatin rink ain’t open all year, and the movies they show all year ain’t funny, and if you wanna smoke, 
smoke in your sleeve or they’ll escort you out. And even at the 
skatin rink you can’t run fast that much, his pal nodded, you 
get a furlow, go to the park, rent them blades, get them sharpened, go here-there, have some *mors* in the buffet, then sprint 
once down the main alley—and right away you’re drenched, 
you can wring your outfit dry, ’cuz it does not befit us to leave 
our pea jackets on the hooks: They’ll damage them, fray them, 
tread on the fleet’s honor. So from that time on they made it 
their custom to do it in turns. One of them is in, and the rest 
stay outside. And they noticed some youngster spyin on them 
from the bushes. They’ve caught him, dragged him in, they’re 
mockin. I asked: Let me be with him alone. They went out, for 
them it makes no difference, they started bakin potatoes. At 
first my trapper was shy, such a touch-me-not, but when I fondled him more carefully, he got tamed. I dozed off, and when I 
woke up—he vanished. The sailors came back, offered me potatoes, three axes, and in October I gave birth—before due 
date. Everythin’s not like with normal people, Granny kept 
complainin. And many things happened around. The sailors 
went missin, the shoemaker also faded away, Granny disappeared somewhere, and my son is gone, but I am still here, I 
live here permanently, as a rule. The geese in Ilya started rufflin 
their feathers, Fomich. ’Cuz, after all, what kind of a sucker, 
flashed thru my mind, I appear to her and to myself, what kind 
of stupid games were we playin, why did we have to drag and 
stretch everythin for months, why did I want to show her my 
respectability-humility? I thought like that and I thought in 
jerks, a water strider. My jerky path thru life tore off by itself, 
like an old rag. As if my everlastin attire got ripped by dogs, and 
partially it did, indeed. I considered this parable seriously and 
with the deeply saddened soul realized that this granny, greatgranny, foresaw everythin to the core, not for naught she was a 
celebrated ragpicker. Yep, Orina, you were known as a walker 
and turned into a typical strumpet. Don’t be cross, I am tired of 
bein prim and proper, so I will force you, teaser, right now, 
here, on the gunboat junk, not waitin for other occasions. I am 
eternally infirm, but I wasn’t always. And I came closer. I will 
howl about it, as it is written, like the jackals and weep like a 
wolverine. Ilya was so tempted that he became a clown, he got 
derailed on account of a skirt; he turned into a cat in heat; his 
reputation got tarnished. If I only knew where you’re gonna 
plop down, I would spread some straw there and would authoritatively burn with lightnin all the shameful tatters, I would 
turn them to ash on behalf of the celestial powers, even though, 
lately, I haven’t seen any special allocations from that agency at 
all. But, in the end, one’s livin not by manna alone, there will 
always be enough mussels for us, there will. So I am fryin them 
slowly; it’s almost supper. Dusk’s all around; evenin’s all about; 
Itil’s all over. But there, where the Wintry Man drives his 
spouse in the carriage to meet the Grim Reaper, a dry leaf coils 
in flight into a roll-up; around Gorodnishche, where they talk 
about Yegor—that is, about Fyodor—it’s pure December, and 
on our Wolf River, though it’s hard to believe, orioles and 
woodpeckers. Steamy and hot are the mussels in their Gehenna, they screech; I feel sorry for them. Nevertheless, I swallow, eat one after another, scrapin from mother-of-pearl what’s 
edible. The Wintry Man is also sad to get rid of his wife, but he 
doesn’t change his mind either. I pity you, he laments, after all, 
I am drivin you to drown you. Well, you don’t have to, she, the 
old rascal, gives him advice, just look back how many years we 
served together. But that’s exactly it, the Wintry Man complains, so many years that I cannot stand you one day more, 
you’re dreary. But I’m askin, he continues, put yourself in my 
position and don’t hold a big grudge against your oaf. No worries, she absolves his sin, to each his own, don’t miss your 
chance, only you too, my friend, don’t judge me too harshly: 
Most likely, I will bother you now and then. Do not, she says, 
wait for me necessarily every night, and yet, now and then I’ll 
drop in to scare you. The masters about Pyotr: What’s with 
Fyodor? And none of them knows nothin properly; they all 
forgot everythin outrite, negligent dummies. Only I, standin 
for some reason among them in December, kept everythin in 
memory. And so, the sitters worked the accounter up about 
hangin—no, you ain’t brave, even though you’re Yegory. He 
got offended at the guzzlers, ’cuz they questioned his darin—
and shortly afterward left the spit, to prove, in the same blue 
haze, that he won’t allow such numbers. And he pilfered what 
he needed where he needed, and hanged without hysterics on 
the waxed twine wound eight times, havin thrown that renowned baluster across from one pine to the other at a proper 
height. And the gardians of the hunt find him in such an independent position and summon a medic from Gorodnishche: 
We request, you understand, your help. He dragged himself in, 
they showed him—go on, heal. The medic says to them: Personally, I am attestin asfyxiation. And we thought that our 
clime’s givin him fits; well, but as far as bein, will he be? I don’t 
promise what I can’t promise, the quack told them. Medical 
profession knows better, they say, it turns out he kicked the 
bucket, poor lonely wretch, he croaked. True, that dame sheltered him at the very end, but even that ain’t worth much—
like from Friday to Thursday, like a carrot and a stick. It would 
be amusin to find out who will be next with her now, with 
whom will she have fun and whom, they kept guessin, she’ll 
make an orphan. That’s what the wardens of Shallow Reach 
were guessin at the outskirts of the village Overbrowears, and 
she has already, one should think, secretly chosen whom exactly. It got clear later, durin the wake after Fyodor, where due 
to the relatively close approach of muscle-buildin winter they 
did not shun to invite me too. We lugged him to Vygodoshchi, 
deliberated for a while, and decided to take the wake outside, 
to the area shared by all, to the islands of Tavern Dawn, about 
which the departed always spoke with such admiration. There’s 
perhaps no place on the entire Wolf River more fittin than 
these scraps of land. At the first sight, just an ordinary spot, 
damp and muddy; well, a birch tree flickers here or there, or a 
mountain ash. But you’ll spend a borin week there, do some 
fishin and lie in the sward with a band of river brigands, lookin 
at billowin clouds and you’ll utter with sobs, quietly-softly: 
Lord, how good it is to be here with You. Would you believe 
the way the water flows—as if it were molasses, flows—as if it 
were standin; the dome of the firmament unnoticeably sneaks 
the entire night toward mornin, and the Heavenly Kingdom 
itself is like that: Either it comes—or it doesn’t. But if you look 
closer—the Itil is rushin, rushin with its entire liquid body. It 
would be wonderful, word of honor, to give up the ghost on 
those free patches. I’m dreamin about departin durin the forest 
harvest, sweetenin my lips with a handful of wild strawberries 
and sinkin into the Life Everlastin with them. Really, Lord, I 
am hangin here for no reason, and in general—what did I lose 
here, what didn’t I see, whom did I come to visit? Or haven’t I 
turned the coarse grindin wheel? No, I don’t need nothin, I 
haven’t lost nothin, and I belong here like a saddle on a pig. 
Where are you, time of my death, why do you dillydally in the 
distance, gimme a sign. But you return to the dry land and 
right away, as a result of all this fussbustle, you forget your reasonin, you suffer and do donkey work unlike Pyotr and them 
other valiant cripples that preferred a reliable rope to drudgery. 
Yeah, we ain’t risk-takin, darin creatures; not high, upon verification, is our soarin.

Krylobyl, the dragon-seer, durin the wake stood up at dawn, 
completely illuminated by the fire, all covered with grass blades 
and creepy-crawlies, and proclaimed in a loud voice, so the 
sleepers around the other fires, includin the wandrin ones, on 
his and other islands, would wake up: Reclinin brethren, we are 
now escortin into nonexistence such a couth of the local hunts, 
as Fyodor, Yegor, Pyotr. We all knew him, that’s why we are 
sad, for that reason we’re ceaselessly drinkin without closin our 
eyes. So let’s commemorate the deceased like real people, let’s 
announce to each other what kind of splendiferous dweller he 
turned out to be. It got noisier than before that Monday around 
the islands; the invited and uninvited started rememberin the 
good deeds of the strangled, and began thirstin for another 
round. In the blackout on Tuesday my turn came, and I report 
that, I won’t hide it, the one responsible for our sad celebrations was a praiseworthy client and that I did grind his racin or 
damascene blades regularly and sharply, in accord with the bill 
of fare. On Wensday a certain gray-winged mail carrier takes 
the floor. Fyodor, he admits, was my soul mate, so I always delivered his mail within reasonable deadlines, haven’t opened 
his letters out of pure curiosity, and if I did open, I sealed them 
back properly. And on Thursday the undertaker found plenty 
to talk about. Our departed, he assures, was an irreplaceable 
upstreamer, but I am also nobody’s fool—I knocked down for 
him a restin place first-class. Mischief-makers they are, these 
undertakers, dreadful. Here’s an example. Have You ever tried 
to dig in the ground with a shovel in freezin season? It turns out 
too mechanical, hard as a rock. So the Bygodoshch folks at first 
wore themselves out, exosted themselves with frozen diggin. 
And they got bored by such a waste of time, they stopped diggin in the cold, they dig in summer and fall, for future use. That 
is, they’ll approximate how many folks in the vicinity will depart in season and they make that many pits—they ain’t too 
lazy to add a few just in case, and later they simply need to even 
it up here and there, and it’s done. And considerin that from 
the middle of the fourth quarter to the middle of the second 
they charge accordin to the frozen price list, it becomes obvious and enviable—winter will be fantabulous for them. And 
Kaluga nicknamed Kostroma happened to turn up among us, 
with a mug double-chinned and sturdy, so sturdy that there was 
no neck. He did not respect the village hustle, sat on an island, 
in a barrel, all shaggy, and had no special likin for the authorities whatsoever. On Sunday he floats in on a raft to our backwater and states: Pyotr should not have gone with that broad. 
Intrestin, what you’d have done, they argued with the wolfman, 
it’s not you who is choosin her but other way around. Doesn’t 
matter, he answered, he shouldn’t have gone; if he didn’t, he 
wouldn’t have gone cuckoo ’cuz of her and wouldn’t share the 
bottle with the sitters, and if he didn’t share, he would be celebratin with all of us. Watch out, Krylobyl fortold Kaluga, or the 
cup may come to you. The same day at sunset Kostroma wakes 
up with an odd feelin: Who was beckonin me from the sedge 
right now? Nobody beckoned you right now. No, somebody 
beckoned, I need to go and see. He dived into the sharp sedge 
and vanished, and when he turned up at the third dawn, they 
surrounded him and kept askin: Well? He told them: She. Was 
it sweet? Don’t ask. He’s grimacin, as if he was havin a seizure. Watch out, Krylobyl warned him, so it doesn’t get bitter. 
On Wensday, Kaluga ate belladonna berries; dyin, he warned: 
Be on gard; from childhood I stared at it and was cautious, but 
today I saw a bush and put caution aside: The berry is ripe, 
large, and so is my misery—we had fun, she told me, and now 
forget it. Therefore, go ahead, touch, these hooves of mine are 
already like ice. And he became thoughtful. Just look, what bad 
luck, complaints are spreadin all over the islands, the bream in 
the rivers is on the spawn, tears the nets, and here—either a 
wake or a funeral. I’ll digress. Have You guessed who that dame 
is, Fomich? Once I was snoozin in my nappin shed—I had a 
dream about eggs: Someone will appear, so you better know. 
I woke up and hobbled outside to pray. A turquoise star fell 
from the sky, the Volga cooled down, my friends and pals 
thinned out, the fences are all covered in hoarfrost, and I myself am no more than just a name on her tablets. Both laughable and rather short I am, a nitwit. The night is like a debtor’s 
jail: Who knows when they’ll drag you out. But You—whoever 
You are—don’t abandon me. That’s how I prayed. And then 
right away the voice: A certain person will visit your places 
and everythin here will turn topsy-turvy. I went, warned; they 
don’t believe me. What kind of stuff are you talkin about, what 
else can turn topsy-turvy here? As you wish. And one day that 
Karaban, a man of non-advanced age, visited our familiar crashbaret. At the threshold he stumbled, and his small transparent 
container in the shape of a flask smashed into smithereens. 
’Nuf guzzlin, he snapped in distress. It became quiet like in the 
deaf and mutes’ shelter. They brought him a treat. He swigged 
it. I was restin, he relates, under the elms, near the site of the 
bathhouse fire, by the pant-washin deck. The night was like 
any other, only greenish, ’cuz of the star, and the moon was 
like any other, only ginger. And down the ginger-moon road, 
like along the decks, from Gybodoshchi to Gorodnishche 
here, over the river reach, approaches, in no hurry, a puzzlin 
unknown woman. At first I decided—some auntie thought she 
would take a bath, she forgot that our splashhouse had burned 
long ago. But then I looked closely and it was none else but 
the Life Everlastin. She’s lookin kind, modest, she’s wearin no 
clothes whatsoever, but you can sense she knows what she’s 
worth, and she’s gorgeous—to tears. She sat down next to me, 
and we exchanged caresses, not straight on but as if someone 
had forbidden us—lightly as a feather. We fooled around for 
a while—and she went away, the speak-of-the-devil. All in all, 
it’s clear—she visited us, she did, concluded Karaban. We had 
a swig then, and a chaser. We’re not guzzlin, he says, but takin 
medicine, and not just any which way, but like pristipomas.
