---
layout: poem
chapter-number: "11"
title: Again the Notes
language: en
---

## Note XIX

### Portrait of a Familiar Warden

- March is crunchy and crispy,
- Icicles clink and clank,
- Melting spots seem to whisper
- And their breath makes you drunk.

- Into dusky gray haven
- By the hoarfrost enhanced,
- You step out, still unshaven,
- In your jacket and pants.

- You have boots that are loose,
- But that isn’t the point,
- One can make simple shoes
- From them and put them on.

- It’s not hard altogether,
- And it’s easy to prove:
- One just needs the spare leather
- Cut from boots and remove.

- You’re a rambler-rag hoarder,
- You are lame, but all right,
- Your strange land’s on the border
- Just between day and night.

- A yoke walks by the fence,
- And a lone bucket swings.
- Even this makes more sense
- Than do all other things.

- You’re a passionate trickster,
- Though your pranks are age-old,
- But don’t cry, there’s a fixter
- Of all snags in the world.

- You’re a warden, a guardian,
- With five fingers per hand:
- Snow is marked in the garden,
- There are prints in the sand.

- Like in old fairy stories,
- Among mighty pine trees
- Curly and without worries
- You live almost for free.

- Your whole life’s but a puff,
- Or a brief wound-up breeze,
- And your lonesome babe’s laugh
- Who’s so willing to please.

- You live in warden’s hovel;
- There’s an oil lamp, a pail,
- An accordion, a shovel,
- And a gun on a nail.

- On the newspapers’ stack
- A bold headline is found:
- Sterlets in Sterlitamak
- And tomato—abound.

- You’re a roisterer seasoned,
- If you drink—then a *shtof*.
- And for that single reason
- Your own dog you call Wolf.

- To the dear riverbank
- Run on your tippy-toes.
- You are full, you are drunk,
- And snuff covers your nose.

- You are tripping and falling
- And, like a frolicking crew,
- Down the slope you are rolling.
- Oh my dear, look at you!

## Note XX

### A Ballad about the Fire Chief from Gorodnishche

- Again in your dreams you onions desire,
- The slush and the splatter make winter roads glum,
- As soon as the drizzle digests all this mire
- To do fire drills the interns will come.
- They’ll come frantic, in coats opened wide,
- Gregarious, in zits and blackheads,
- In light jackets, in two-wheeled bouncy rides,
- Lean and pale—like the sheets on their beds.
- The expert in the ways snipes escape,
- Shiny helmet and cartridge belts sporting,
- Will not shoot wood grouse while it’s courting,
- But will whip the loudmouths in shape.
- Fire chief—an individuum in years,
- Whom asthma and blisters made sour,
- In April, when the stars are so clear,
- Will slowly ascend his watchtower.
- The intern on guard tells the story,
- Saluting the helmet, yet chary,
- Of fires that burn in Izhory,
- But cunningly meaning Stozhary.
- The chief will salute back: But not here.
- And he’ll look toward the estuary,
- Where he wasted so many years,
- At the fire-watch gruel preparing.
- He will look—and his calm will decline,
- So at dawn, angry and bellicose,
- At the firewall, all the interns in line
- Fire chief drenches from fire hose.

## Note XXI

### Overbrowears

#### (A Garland of Notes)

- 1
- *Unsettling moments. Period of disgrace.*
- Pranks set the brows and the ears on fire.
- “Can there be Overbrowears?” they inquired.
- I responded: “It’s a farm, a tiny place.”

- 2
- *Does it behoove to tease and make a face?*
- To mock all things like spoiled brats, spreading sorrow,
- Show no respect for yesterdays, tomorrows,
- Forgetting conscience, honor, even grace?

- 3
- *Just look at me—what a trusting fool!*
- I failed to figure, though I am quite clever,
- That over brow ears can’t happen, ever,
- While Overbrowears farm can, as a rule.

- 4
- *My ears are red—I’m no longer cool.*
- Unpleasant rumors circulate all over
- That I’m a creep, a binger, a pushover,
- A cabbagehead with two ears to pull.

- 5
- *Unsettling moments, period of disgrace.*
- *Does it behoove to tease and make a face?*
- *Just look at me—what a trusting fool!*
- *My ears are red—I’m no longer cool.*

## Note XXII

### Farewell of the Tinker from Gorodnishche

- Sludge ice is gone. And at the harbor
- The cashier clicked his register’s keys.
- Look at your circumstances much harder;
- Hang your felts on the mantelpiece.
- Limping and as if by accident vernal
- Spring has wandered to our Valday.
- Say—farewell, our dear taverna,
- Take a hike, beat it, goodbye!
- They sent a she-goat nut-picking
- And a he-goat in the garden they let—
- To fix teapots broken or leaking
- Beyond rivers the tinkers are set.
- So forgive us, dear joint, that we’re parting,
- When it snows, we’ll be back, right behind.
- You are always so kind and inviting,
- A shelter for the mute and the blind.
- Beyond rivers, the tin is much brighter,
- There the borscht is thicker, and reeds.
- In the leas with that windbag too flighty
- You will deal—and you’ll patch in the leas.
- Beyond rivers, life seems to be freer,
- And yet, rather than praise Tula tin,
- With the cripples and revelers here
- This whole summer I should have stayed in.
- Fare-thee-well, Gorodnishche, my brothers,
- As they say, flap your wing for goodbye,
- ’Cause who knows when again with each other
- We will sit at this table—you and I?
- So don’t fuss with my clothes’ rips and holes,
- Since my cane can’t wait to go forth.
- But, old woman, now pour me a whole
- Hunderd-fifty grams of sweet port.
- There’s a schedule at our harbor,
- And on the steamboat—a café.
- There, Graf-like conceited and hardened,
- Stands the barkeep in his *galife*.

## Note XXIII

### Portrait of the Ferryman

- Sing, ferry driver,
- Chatty and wacky,
- Carrot-top jack.
- Crafty conniver,
- Sing of craft’s cracking
- And caulk the cracks.

- Sing of boat’s gears,
- Rowlocks’ responses,
- And anchor’s roll.
- And of the years’
- Entire nonsense,
- Eh, darn them all.

- I so adore it,
- When, like a pixie,
- Lively and spry,
- Seeking no glory,
- You’re deftly fixing
- What’s lying by.

- Your hammer’s knocking
- And outside calling
- In April light.
- Instead of talking,
- Let us go strolling
- Before the night.

- It smells of mastic,
- Foot-bindings, candles,
- All over, but
- Having no practice,
- Miss Spring resembles
- A splendid slut.

- When on the morrow
- Afar you see me—
- Telescope eyes—
- Forget your sorrows
- And, widely beaming,
- Get some supplies.

- Don’t skimp, you gap-tooth,
- But open wide
- Your smorgasbord.
- And I’ll be apt to
- Some food provide—
- Five kopecks worth.

- Waters are splashing,
- Flow by themselves
- To reach their goal;
- The years are passing,
- And we ourselves
- Just live, that’s all.

## Note XXIV

### Between the Dog

- Once, between the dog and wolf,
- By willows that weep,
- A warden let his needle drop—
- Did not stitch the rip.
- He searched in the grassy pall
- Each spot he could see,
- And he found some kind of ball
- In this verdant lea.
- And he calls: My brothers, hey,
- Just look what I found!
- They came by, began to play,
- And had lots of fun.
- They would kick the ball around
- Or play toss and catch,
- ’Til the evening dew set down
- Right on the green patch.
- And the thick fogs would alight
- Crawling out from swamps,
- In their huts folks would ignite
- The wicks of their lamps.
- And the fogs from Volga’s swamps
- Licked the keels and poked,
- There was little oil in lamps
- So the wicks just smoked.
- And the tugboats floated by
- Heavy barges towing,
- While the hoopoes in the sky
- Wooed oxpeckers, cawing.
- Tugboats floated by the bogs
- Without or with barges
- And who knows if wolves or dogs
- Into woods were charging.
- Unexpectedly the ball
- Lit up bright, not far.
- They looked closely—it was all
- Stozhary’s main star.
- On this foggy star, forsooth,
- With their eyes aglow,
- Lots of plain, unvarnished truth
- All the wardens know.
- There, the wispy fogs alight,
- Crawling out from swamps,
- People in their huts ignite
- The wicks of their lamps.
- There, between the dog and wolf
- By willows that weep,
- A warden let his needle drop—
- Did not stitch the rip.

## Note XXV

### Portrait of a Courier

#### (The Second Recollection of the City)

- What does “a courier” mean? Consider
- That to ensure success for strangers
- And in this world to make some changes
- One goofball pedals hither-thither.
- It’s like a calling, someone said.

- He’s single. With his clueless head
- Snapping the branches of bird cherry,
- Addressing to it many queries—
- Like what’s “a courier,” why, and when?—
- Forgetting he should darn his stockings,
- And also constantly chain-smoking,
- His bike completely overworking,
- He flickers like a wound-up man.


- He’s poor and foolish, and high-strung.
- Nanny, why can’t I sleep tonight?
- If old—he makes himself look young
- And if he’s young—he’ll soon be old.
- He’s feverish and he has a cold
- With inflammation. But chin up:
- I’ll shave! Oh, nanny, where’s my brush?
- How come? It’s very late, don’t rush!
- Silence, slop-slinger, in my nap
- I saw a firebird in flight—
- It said we’ll marry in a snap.

- And though he fears he’ll get cut up,
- He hones his blade in lunar light.

- Crossing the country left and right,
- Its center and provincial places,
- He’s stunned by how the world is turning
- And like a boiling cauldron churning,
- Revealing both events and faces
- Cooler than movies new or old:
- Here’s lion hunting, here—a ball,
- There—a half-naked lass in laces,
- And—for your pleasure—even more:
- A centipede on cellar’s floor.
- And from the window mother screams:
- For winter seal the window seams!

- Now winter’s gone—spring will grow twigs;
- The courier is the mud decrying,
- With which the messy street keeps trying
- To splash his buttocks and is using
- To this end spokes of quite amusing
- And fashionable britskas, gigs,
- Landaus, and other kinds of rigs.

- And like a decoy mallard duck
- In rifle sight condemned to quack
- And with a line for drying clothes
- Tied to the hunter, lest it’s lost,
- The courier cannot ever see
- How very different he could be
- If he were not worn out by riding
- More than the decoy by its gliding,
- If he were born beneath a star
- Unlike the courier’s, shining far,
- And duck—beyond its decoy star.

- (NB: A river, when the dusk has set,
- When it’s too late for bilboquet,
- When samovars are finally ready
- And on verandas chatter’s steady,
- When, having bid his knitting bye,
- Grandpa *The Catcher in the Rye*
- Reads out to Grandma; also when
- She seemed to be in doubt,
- But held cheese in her mouth;
- When knocks of flint stones got quite loud
- And let us add another *when*—
- When wires disappeared—just then
- We see the stars in waters deep:
- But they’re all decoys, there they sleep,
- And to be with them, from the skies
- Others fall down and please the eyes:
- So make a wish, don’t hesitate.)

- But no such luck. It seems that fate
- Sets all decisions right in stone.
- From a department in some state
- I brought this mail, for you alone.
- Say, will this junk be never gone?
- I’m sorry, ma’am, but I don’t know,
- Therefore, sign on the line below.

- And so the courier rides once more,
- He turns or goes straight as before.
- Please tell me who you are, my dear?
- Well, old man, I am not from here.
- A dog will bark at him, and follow,
- The boob will look around and swallow,
- Swallow and look, and gulp some air,
- And take a catnap, one could swear,
- And then he’ll spit, and with his shoe
- Rub in the spittle,
- And afterward, out of the blue,
- He’ll sob a little.

- The time will come—all things will pass:
- People are happy. The mead drips
- Upon a dickey from the glass,
- Not reaching the bissextile lips,
- While Hoopoe begs outside the joint
- For loose change to buy booze,
- And inside someone yells, annoyed:
- You want a swig?—You lose!

- Now nightingale begins to mill,
- Now windmill starts to trill!

- Crossing the land both bright and dreary,
- The land unquenched and mostly arid,
- And with his head washed only rarely
- Snapping the branches of bird cherry,
- Addressing to it many queries,
- The courier speeds and rushes, weary,
- And toward morning, home, on board,
- He moans and groans: Oh, my dear Lord,
- That’s what it means . . . 

## Note XXVI

### Postal Chores in the Month of May

- {:.indent-1} Why doesn’t he write to me, my most esteemed *oncle*,
- {:.indent-1} Is it possible he does not have time again whatsoever?
- {:.indent-1} It’s strange—because he promised: I will write to you unfailingly.
- {:.indent-1} Well, look, he doesn’t write and doesn’t come back, absolutely.
- <small>5</small>  Gazing beyond the river, I gazed-out my eyes completely,
- {:.indent-1} He could have sent me at least a pictogram, my dear relative,
- {:.indent-1} He could have said, it’s so-and-so, such-and-such plans I consider,
- {:.indent-1} ’Cause otherwise, where to run—I couldn’t even imagine,
- {:.indent-1} With such an uncle topsy-turvy things constantly happen.
- <small>10</small>  Washing my feet with the dew as I’m walking,
- {:.indent-1} I will set out at dawn to welcome our mail carrier:
- {:.indent-1}Are you bringing me at this time a package, as we usually call it?
- {:.indent-1}No, he disappoints, apparently, he disappoints, they’re still writing,
- {:.indent-1}Apparently, your addressees are careful and thoughtful.
- <small>15</small>  Fine, we will stand there, shoot the breeze for a few moments,
- {:.indent-1}Afterward I will invite him to my humble dwelling:
- {:.indent-1}Eh, drop in for a while, my dear friend Sila Silych,
- {:.indent-1}You’ll be my guest, you know, we’ll converse a little,
- {:.indent-1}Did I brew the nectar yesterday for no reason?
- <small>20</small>  For no reason, my dear Nestor, nobody here brews nectars,
- {:.indent-1}For no reason, in the world practically nothing can happen,
- {:.indent-1}For no reason, even a curly hare won’t appear in night ravings.
- {:.indent-1}We will, of course, partake of your nectar without postponement.
- {:.indent-1}So the dearest postman Sila Silych comes in, so he enters,
- <small>25</small>  Such a shorty, extremely unimpressive to look at,
- {:.indent-1}Although he could drink under the table even Krylobyl in person;
- {:.indent-1}That means: Trust the appearances, but always keep double-checking.
- {:.indent-1}Yep, so he dropped in to visit me, Sila Silych,
- {:.indent-1}Uh, he dropped in, and, having taken his hat off, wiped his lips with it,
- <small>30</small>  Well, right away I poured for the messenger and for myself also:
- {:.indent-1}Let us drink, good folks, let us drink, fellow villagers,
- {:.indent-1}Let us drink, since today we’re alive, and who knows what will happen tomorrow.
- {:.indent-1}Who knows, who knows, he nods, nothing here is clear,
- {:.indent-1}Now you find it and now in an instant you lose it,
- <small>35</small>  Not to mention that when you allow yourself to kick the bucket,
- {:.indent-1}Then, whether you write or not—everything into dust is turning,
- {:.indent-1}There your postscriptums are as useless as a dead horse’s beating.
- {:.indent-1}Saying this, Silych instantly emptied the glass entirely,
- {:.indent-1}And my actions corresponded to Silych’s exactly:
- <small>40</small>  I gulped and afterward dispensed some more, with no ceremony,
- {:.indent-1}In order not to procrastinate cunningly with the second.
- {:.indent-1}And then I says to him, to my dear pal Sila Silych,
- {:.indent-1}So here you and I live, so here we chew our daily,
- {:.indent-1}But you know what the folks on the other shore are gabbing,
- <small>45</small>  Many things, honest, on that shore they’re gabbing,
- {:.indent-1}“The wolves,” they are gabbing, “ate you there, apparently,”
- {:.indent-1}What do you think—are those facts or perhaps just fables?
- {:.indent-1}I heard, I heard, they reported to me the news also,
- {:.indent-1}The guest rejoined, caressing in unison my ocelot.
- <small>50</small>  But I am slightly thrown off my kilt and befuddled,
- {:.indent-1}Perhaps they ate but perhaps it’s just an empty rumor,
- {:.indent-1}It’s anybody’s guess, as Grandma used to say wisely.
- {:.indent-1}Then Silych and I had another mouthful, roundly-soundly,
- {:.indent-1}Or, as it is commonly called, we redoubled.
- <small>55</small>  With my friend Silych having seen to the brew’s termination,
- {:.indent-1}I decided to incite my friend Silych to engage in something:
- {:.indent-1}Why don’t we read at random some of the messages?
- {:.indent-1}Right, Yasha, your pate is reasoning properly,
- {:.indent-1}Silych answers with dignity my proposition,
- <small>60</small>  Are we supposed to be worser than the other mail carriers?
- {:.indent-1}It’s an unheard of thing not to read someone’s epistles.
- {:.indent-1}What other stuff would you expect us to be reading?
- {:.indent-1}And then we’ve opened several scrolls together.
- {:.indent-1}We look—what kind of stuff people compose to each other,
- <small>65</small>  With what, it appears, don’t they seem to be concerned:
- {:.indent-1}Widely and mightily flows epistle-writing between the people,
- {:.indent-1}Like some epidemic it is spreading all over.
- {:.indent-1}For instance, Pavel from Gorodnishche writes to Pyotr in Bydogoshch,
- {:.indent-1}Begs his uncle to purchase the yeast for hooch-brewing,
- <small>70</small>  He implores him to find without fail some alphabet letter,
- {:.indent-1}He keeps prying, a knife to his throat he is holding,
- {:.indent-1}He doesn’t let his uncle get sloshed in the crashbaret even a smidgen.
- {:.indent-1}Pyotr from Gorodnishche sharply replies to Pavel in Bydogoshch:
- {:.indent-1}My dear, keep up your incessant search for the letter,
- <small>75</small>  But the money, given by you, I pissed away entirely,
- {:.indent-1}Therefore, you should know that the yeast I will bring you unlikely,
- {:.indent-1}And besides, Ilya the grinder, a total outsider,
- {:.indent-1}In his old age suddenly also became attracted to a *stilo*,
- {:.indent-1}A grievance to Sidor Fomich Pozhilykh he scribbled,
- <small>80</small>  He complains—during a snowstorm someone lifted his crutches,
- {:.indent-1}The wardens of Shallow Reach, he claims, absconded with them.
- {:.indent-1}After a while, the whipper-in will also get a document:
- {:.indent-1}Hunting-dog master, if there was no necessity to do it,
- {:.indent-1}Would I really outline the following to you? Not really.
- <small>85</small>  Halloo, your people a pair of my supports pilfered,
- {:.indent-1}They’d better return them as soon as possible, drifters,
- {:.indent-1}Or, tell them, all of you won’t be safe even in heaven.
- {:.indent-1}The wardens scratch the birch bark to the grinder collectively,
- {:.indent-1}Apparently, the whipper-in passed to them Ilya’s ultimatum:
- <small>90</small>  Master-buster, a specter both stupid and foolish,
- {:.indent-1}We couldn’t care less even if we saw you in the box with your crutches,
- {:.indent-1}You’d better hop, bloated, to your lonesome babe at the farmhouse,
- {:.indent-1}And if you start snitching—you’ll taste the real misfortune.
- {:.indent-1}Having read the writs and with chewed crumbs having resealed them,
- <small>95</small>  We finished drinking, emptied the spacious jug to the bottom,
- {:.indent-1}The time to part arrived then for me and for Silych.
- {:.indent-1}Eh, he put on his hat and proceeded to exit,
- {:.indent-1}He hugged me, his soul mate, kissed me—and departed.
- {:.indent-1}Silych, I said, why is my *oncle* to me endlessly writing?
- <small>100</small>  For no reason, he responded, not even a hare to us, the curly.
- {:.indent-1}In the meantime, in Bydogoshch, all the alders—florescence.

## Note XXVII

### Not the Firebird's . . . 

- Not the firebird’s bright outfit
- Hops and rumbles in the grass,
- But Elijah, our prophet,
- In his chariot rides to us.
- God be with him! Ergo—thunder!
- Ergo—lightning! Never mind!
- So the wardens smoke and wonder
- Why the rain still lags behind.
- Lightning turns all things to sterling,
- In the keeve the mash aboil,
- And above it stands the twirling,
- Serpentine condensing coil.
- And this viper, self-constructed,
- Source of profit and delight,
- Was mysteriously abducted
- From the grinders to this site.
- We’re not looking for excuses,
- Well, we pilfered it, so what?
- He who mocks the poor, abuses
- His own Maker a whole lot.
- The procedure is consistent:
- Wardens wait, the drops still lag.
- And in contrast—in an instant
- Tomcat pounces on a bug.
- Plus, quite often, now as ever,
- Just to spite us—life’s a flash,
- And in contrast—lasts forever
- The most common scraper brush.
- I will pass. Who would believe this?
- I was—I’ll be just a ghoul,
- And the dawn, blind and oblivious,
- Will trip over my pulped soul.
- To my lonesome babes’ loud snivel
- And weed-trampling underfoot,
- My white body—a soap’s sliver
- Will be hauled on its last route.
- But so far—on shore, delighted,
- In my cap I sit with pals,
- Please preserve, oh God Almighty,
- Our rowboats from the squalls.
- For auspicious outcome hoping,
- Now, a hunter’s suit I hem,
- But my needles, darn, are dropping:
- Ergo—pickled, hence—I am.
