---
layout: narrative
chapter-number: "12"
title: Discords Beyond the Itil
language: en
---

We’ve gathered closer to discuss what happened 
but the orchestrion resounded and we could not 
stop ourselves from a potpoorie. Eh, you gal with 
flair, you’re my dancin pair, with an awkward air, and no longer 
fair. Woe is you, great Gorodnishche, the most mightiest town, 
briefly flashed through my mind durin the dance. And really. 
Precisely on that day started these discords Beyond the Itil, 
that is, these mishaps that are the reason I’m gettin broke payin 
the office fees. Have you heard the news? Burbots, in love with 
the moon, try to swim to it thru the air and slowly suck holes in 
ice. Similarly, the male species lost their cool and went crazy on 
account of that dame. They, our crucians, surface on the hillock at dusk, sit on whatever they can, and dream all out about 
her, suckin from the bottle. They’re waitin, hopin she’ll appear 
again, even though everyone knows she visits rarely, and when 
she does visit, she can be seen only by the chosen ones, for 
whom these randevoos, as a rule, turn into a disaster. So let’s 
give what’s due to the mentioned Gury, Fyodor, Kaluga, or to 
V. Karaban, who did not depart yet but dried up and barks: 
Keeps clearin his throat. Woe is you, Gorodnishche and your 
environs; everythin around you is both desolate and false. A 
lonely fellow assures his lonesome babe: I am goin to our backwater to round up some fish. But he’ll circle around the islands, 
make a few drafts—and all folks suddenly see him among 
them in the crashbaret havin a glass of vino. The invalidual 
returns home, starts doin what he did before. We stir up trouble, clown around, mischief-makers, don’t care about anythin, 
it’s disgustin to look at us. Do You think we don’t know the 
proper manners? Ain’t we well bred, as we should? We know, 
we’re well bred, even hands before eatin, like them Farisees, 
we strive to wash, but mainly it makes no difference—we misbehave, find ourselves outside of the norms of decency. And 
the greed overcame us too. We are lyin under the elms, begin 
to celebrate, and various folks appear out of the blue: Won’t 
you give us some? And we ain’t givin, we are pissed: Scram, 
the store’s still open, manage your feast yourself, freakin alkies. And thievery, excuse me, thievery out of this world, and it 
turns out there’s nothin to push off with.


I was walkin, keep readin, from the other side of our common river, returnin on Christmas Eve from Gury, from his funeral. The refreshments were provided by that undertaker; he 
invited: Crawl in, all who want, let’s have a gulp to keep the 
buzz goin; hearts are trumps. I crawled in. A young fellow was 
rottin, they say, in a Caucasian damp joint, and when the captivity got tiresome—he ran away. And I also got bored with 
this wake, I wanted to go back to my repairmen, I wanted 
to celebrate Christmas with them. The youngster got lost in 
the mountains—and I in the dusk. I was skatin homeward, 
and the strong wind was squeezin the tear out, and it—it was 
rollin merrily. So far we’re not missin any screws, we know what 
it means to get our legs shod in blades. Nevertheless, it’s sort 
of sad between the dog in the expanses of native rivers, it makes 
you feel an urge to whimper like that tramp at a quarter after 
three. Fog—who knows whether it’s a place or a face, shadow 
or light, Gorodnishche or Bygodoshch: I revved up the tempo. 
A miner’s storm lamp, given to me by the head dog master as 
payment for various minor services, was knockin about in the 
bast creel behind my spine, and there was gurglin in the container. But I did not hurry to light it; in the night blindness it’ll 
get even blinder, so—we call it a bat. Contradiction, blunder. 
After all, it doesn’t make itself blind—it makes us blind with 
its rays, therefore it appears we are bats, and bats ain’t us, ever. 
Why, I hasten to ask, Aladdin Rakhmatullin ain’t among us 
now, but stays lonely under water? And why did he, the rash 
racer, light his lantern in the grayish air? The homeless clouds 
stiffened, my clothes also stiffened, the ground draft crawled 
up my ankels. And as soon as the timber town, like in a water 
decal, started faintly showin through the murk, I, old shoe that 
I am, understood that all of its houses are sewn from the ashcolored corduroy with a wide wale, and their roofs from felt, 
or perhaps someone stole from the hat factory undyed matted 
wool. Psst . . . Evenin is bein evenin, folks walk from fact’ry, free, 
Marusya swallowed poison, hospital-bound she’ll be. Who 
knows if from the factory or not, but various river folks kept 
walkin on hockey and figure skates over this dark blue worsted 
wool; some with an idea of a promenaid, some from the woods 
with Christmas trees, some to the store, but all of them far, far 
away, not nearby. It turns dreary when one’s alone; I got tense. 
Believe it or not, but there is someone invisible among us. I 
applied the skate’s brake and extracted the lamp—burn, burn 
brightly, with fire it’s not as scary. And at that moment I spotted 
a wolf behind the snow piles. Don’t be surprised, in winter that 
public keeps wandrin hither and thither—boatload of tracks. 
They’re lucky, the animals, that the freeze bridges the waters 
and one can manage without any Doom. Ferry over, they tell 
him, to the other side a goat, a cabbage, and even a jackaloo. 
Only not together but in turns, so they don’t finish each other 
off after unloadin. And who will be paired with whom, and 
who will ride alone—it’s your decision. I don’t wanna carry 
either a goat or a cabbage, said Doom, and much less the other 
one, even if in a muzzle; we have enough peripeties at the 
crossin without that. And when I noticed beyond the snowdrifts the gray hide and the eyes resemblin the precious iridescent Christmas tree ball, I got discouraged, a fearful billy goat. 
If I run, the predator will give chase, grab by the nape—and 
it’s all over, you’ve bit the dust. Yes, I got anxious, but more 
precisely—got angry, rebellious. There’s nothin out of the ordinary in dyin, and accordin to the earlier-mentioned reasons, 
it’s required. But to have the master suffer death on account of 
the primeval beast is inappropriate, rude; one has to get some 
respect, even if the most tiniest; after all, not all of us are harried 
alive, we’re not a complete ragtag rabble. I won’t succumb to the 
pangs of his fangs; I will fight, like that escaped youngster in the 
Chuchmek mountains fought, breathin rapidly. I put the bat 
down on the snow, took off the creel; my courage came back. The 
beast is sittin, observin, he turned his head sideways. Why are 
you sorrowful, Wolfie, attack, if you dare. He’s stubborn, doesn’t 
do it. I take from under my shirt a bread ration of peeled rye 
and beckon: Come, devour, you’re probably starvin. The wolf 
stole up, ferocious, keeps waggin his tail—snap—and swallowed my piece. I was nimble, Citizen Pozhilykh, grabbed 
him by his collar—and started poundin. It’s no picnic for an 
invalidual to keep his balance durin such fracases, especially 
on a single blade, but some experience had been accumulated; 
here, rarely a week passes without battles on ice. When we, the 
stumps, gather to twist and turn over the slick, one word leads 
to another; with the prosthesis across the temple—and with 
whatever is around we start mutilatin our fellow creatures. 
Such strategies make little sense, of course, but still: Friendship gets stronger and excessive foolishness gets knocked out 
and away. The adversary initially showed obstinacy, just kept 
spinnin around like on a stake, yelpin, but subsequently could 
not take it—and darted. He overturned Ilya, but as long as the 
collar held, I was thwartin the flight, and our twosome rolled, 
completely wild, dappled white, like devils in the mill. And suddenly my lamp went out, my hand weakened—and the jackaloo flew the coop. And the boozin daze overwhelmed me, I am 
lyin sauced, steamin—like a jellied pike perch on the crystal 
of the Itil. And though the blizzard crawls into the folds of my 
clothes and my hair is splittin—I am delighted. With hand on 
my heart, where and when else can one experience things like 
that? What a victory—I overcame the predator. But if you tell 
someone—they’ll doubt it: Where’s the hide? We are stalwart 
materialists, Pozhilykh, we believe in the hide, but about happiness—we’re on our gard. And from the hill, from the highest 
hill, like the tsar’s decree about clemencies, a huge huntin party 
was rollin down to the crashbaret, retirin from the watchful 
thickets. Krylobyl was carryin on his shoulder a small kill, and 
the shooters, up to twelve in number—the corpse of a razorback. It’s intrestin that the mugs of those carriers, due to what 
they’ve been downin beforehand, became exactly like snouts, 
and they were walkin for some reason on half-bent legs. Congrats, congrats, I greeted the hunters. Rats, rats, they trumpet, 
gloomy as if they had died. Apparently the cold deprived their 
tongues of their rights. Happy approachin, I said. Roachin, garbled Krylobyl, poachin. Listen, what a pleasant twilight, I said, 
evenin’s smokin. Right, agreed the old man, croakin.


At last I’ve rolled up to my destination, and I tumble into the 
workshop. By these hours the entire grindin co-op gathered 
there—it gathered, started frolickin. Some got involved in the 
sacrilegious beetle, others in the break-them-up, and some, not 
afraid of hernia, allowed themselves to play juggle ball, firmin 
up a few rags together with twine. They behave outrageously, 
dissolutely, and to straighten them up, to slap them on the 
wrist, there’s positively nobody; happy-go-lucky behaviors had 
spread all over—a million of them. And then, havin gulped 
some plunk, I flung at my colleagues the Christmas Eve confession-homily. About-goners and youngsters, I summoned, more 
than a thousand years ago, Mary the Southerner gave birth to 
the Son of Man. He grew up and, in particular, announced: If 
even one palm corrupts you—don’t be shy, cut it off immediately. ’Cuz how much more wonderful it is to partially flourish 
in these here times than smolder whole in that Gehenna. We’re 
all amputees, and our future is bright. Take, for example, me 
personally. An offspring of my mother and father, permanent 
fools in Christ from the stoop of Vagankovo and All Saints, 
respectively, I began the same way, but after the famed event, 
my cursed fate, fanned with carbolic acid and insence, changes 
to the core. I engage in various trades and learn them—inside 
out. As a result of my wandrin ordeals, in their conclusion, I 
arrive here and join this co-op. I am standin here in front of 
you, you all know me. Let the abomination of complete desolation, the flabby, decrepit, and slurrin dwarf with a woodpecker 
beak, descend on us tomorrow at lunch. But even in front of 
her mugognomy I will claim, sayin it with pride, that I know 
no name loftier than the modest soberquet of the Russian riverside grinder. And if I hear a thunderin voice—throw Your 
knives-scissors away, but sharpen, if You know what I mean, for 
the sake of the common good the right shore of the Itil until it’s 
an awesome sting, similar to a scythe, then I will answer: You 
asked for it, You got it! But don’t be envious that from the outside I am mighty and tough—inside I am simply a softy. And 
whether I grind my teeth or metal—I just grind them, while 
my longin after Orina is grindin me. What a woman, one won’t 
forget her at any price. But don’t cast dispersions, better repent. All of you did secure for yourself permanent honey pies, 
but the sweetness of the unknown ladies, of the temporary 
ones, attracts, and you desire them, committin a sin. I know, 
you pity your usual lonesome babes ’til death do you part, ’cuz, 
fortifyin themselves, they endure the unbearable burdens of 
your corrupt bodies and natures. But you also fell in love with 
the visitin dame, and you love her devotedly, even though she’s 
nobody to you, and I will call this, like the scandals and thievery, Discords Beyond the Itil. In principle, one should bring 
down fire on you, but I will wait a bit ’cuz I am also no angel, 
no better than you—I’m registered with one, share a household 
with her, but I am burnin for another. That’s why the tall tales 
of crickets behind the stove are bothering llya. The moment 
I hear them—our outins and rides to suburban little towns 
with grasshoppers come to the surface. So don’t cast dispersions and that’s the end of it. In those tipsy periods, different 
visitors like tinkers, buoy keepers, and loggers appeared here. 
They made excuses—we were drawn to the light—but in fact 
came to get treated for free. And they inquired: Won’t you reveal who bangothumped all the mange out from the dog-master’s bitch? Gentlemen, I have no clue; if the jackaloo, then yep, 
he did get beat up—tufts were flyin all over. And I gave them 
my account of the battle, receivin a shower of applause. When 
the holidays ended, I leave the co-op and, a braggart, ascend to 
Gorodnishche. Yearnin after homemade pancakes was drivin 
me under the warm roof; I also needed some tenderness. What 
did I understand, wandrin—how everythin is arranged? I did 
not understand nothin, wandrin, includin how everythin is arranged. I only see every lonesome babe is a trap net, Fomich, 
she’s a trap net, and we—we’re ordinary ruffs, and sooner or 
later we’ll be hers. Do You remember that case: a drawin called 
*Unexpected Return*? I also lumbered back, filled with remorse, 
and she’s beratin me: What, you lumbered back, you darned 
lame horse? I could not bear such slander, on Candlemas I 
gave my hands free rein, but my pal-gal did not fall far behind, 
took advantage of my condition. After that we made peace, 
she got generous and fried pancakes for me, and later even allowed me to get close. As soon as the mornin has broken, I 
jump out into the entrance hall—my indispensable accessories are missin, though I, bein of sound mind and memory, left 
them there, in a pickle barrel, and even covered them with a 
lid. I got used to keepin them there—my lonesome babe, Her 
Neatfreakness, does not permit me to bring crutches into the 
chambers: Even with your single sole there’s plenty of trouble, 
I just walk behind you and keep wipin. And I: But you yourself 
husk the sunflower seeds on the floor. And she: I haven’t asked 
you what I can husk; so far it’s not me who’s a squatter here but 
you. I looked at the porch—analogy. The witch was already 
warmin up the chow on the stovetop. My friend, quoth I to 
that woman, why did you dispatch my supports into the stove 
for the benefit of the ever-burnin fire? Eh, you don’t know what 
you’re babblin, she cuts me off. In that case—they got filched, 
I concluded. Serves you right, she scoffed, how many times I 
warned you not to be lazy to stick the bolt in the latch in the 
evenin—and you didn’t even prick up your ears, so now sort it 
out. No, it serves you right, you pipette, it was you who forced 
me to leave them in the entrance hall, so from now on you’ll 
have to drive Ilya everywhere on a sled, ’cuz personally I find 
no evidence of any savins to purchase a new pair, and whether 
you will have enough strength to meddle with the wretch or 
not—it’s nobody’s concern, and on which sled are you plannin 
to pull me on May Day, it doesn’t worry me in the least. Yakyak-yak, she utters, yak-yak-yak, the tattered chatterbox. The 
same day, I discovered by the gate a note delivered on the sly, 
secured with the indecent elastic from underwear and entitled: Affidavit. I’m quotatin: Given to Citizen I. P. Sindirela 
and attestin that his accessories went missin in connection 
with the fact that on such-and-such date of the river-freezin 
month he walloped with them the huntin bitch Mumu, therefore it’s unlikely they’ll be returned to him; the wardens of the 
Shallow Reach. So I scribble to their whipper-in—a wolf. The 
whipper-in responds—a Vizsla. And our chronicle started. It 
started and continues and I am sittin here without stirrin, stuck 
in place. My professional calluses slowly begin to shrink, and 
instead I am developin writin ones. What else am I involved 
in? I keep fightin with my scatterbrain, I recall for her zesty 
chastushkas: Girls once argued at the dacha which one had the 
shaggiest cha-cha; it turned out the shaggiest cha-cha had the 
owner of the dacha. She’s gigglin—like a jingle bell. In addition, I am gazin at the past—my journeys, wandrins.


So depict somethin for farewell, the courier kept grievin, start 
somethin ours, make it as heartrendin as possible, or play 
somethin general railroad-like. I yanked the bellows and the 
inspector’s providin description. He’s providin description and 
I am singin: To distant destination will soon depart the train, 
the cars will leave the station, the platform will remain. The 
station has a clock, the brick wall is all red, the kerchiefs a white 
flock, the eyes so deeply sad. Uh, that’s a great one, grieved the 
bro. I am singin and he reports. About the hunt, about the time 
when, not so long ago, he went huntin for the firebird, and how, 
on the approach to Zhmerinka, someone shamelessly carried 
off from the car his huntin boots. Or how in his youth a certain 
person lost her head gazin at him; she served at the N-junction, 
with a motley *schlagbauman*, and the lieutenant, in those years 
a cornet, paid zero attention. The smokin car will ask about my 
now, my past, I’ll tell a bunch of crap to shock and make them 
pout. What truly I gave up they don’t need to find out. Durin 
the hunt, flabbergasted by the theft, he shot at the target but 
missed, and now, attired in regalia, but havin wasted the entire century, he’s got the feelin that he blew off the most importantest bird of his fate, very likely not around Zhmerinka 
but on that motleyish switch, givin the gal the cold shoulder. 
And they found her, he says, at the foot of the embankment. 
A sailor in striped shirt will open his poor heart, he’ll say that 
he is hurt and that his life is hard. He’ll reach his destination, 
won’t look back at the train, the cars will leave the station, the 
platform will remain. I sang and suffered: Oh, you swallow of 
mine, for whom did you leave me, havin taken the son and 
havin changed your and his last name, and where are you both 
right now—nobody knows. On the Don’s shore, a branch of 
maple, and on your kerchief, soaked through with tears. You 
were called around the barracks Orina Neklina, and to whom 
do you belong now, to what kind of, let’s suppose, Spacklin, 
ah? And the sailor—the sailor You met in the car—have You 
figured out who he was? Earlier I also didn’t know who he was, 
from which fleet, lost or discharged? He seemed so unknown 
that one could erect a monument to him. Right now I believe 
he was the sailor Albatrosov, discharged for good. Be patient, 
we got acquainted as the train went on. And the deputy started 
weepin, can’t enjoy the song enough. You see, a Russian tune 
moves even the big ranks, so what do You expect from me, a 
tiny worm—I completely lost it. And if one looks out of the 
window—there’s also not much joy: shacks made of timber, 
December. And some vagabond Gypsy—exactly like us—with 
a sack on a stick and bunches of pretzels on his neck instead of 
necklaces, tramples the shroud of native expanses, and even if 
he acts like the devil-may-care, we read in his eyes that the situation sucks, that wandrins are distant and constant, even if 
not personally for us, and when we croak, it will be the others’ 
turn, and no special indulgences are anticipated. My past and 
present fiascos I esplained in two words—and it was rockin on 
switches. You may get envious: Yes, Ilya, you are truly blessed, 
you suffered and knew much sorrow. Don’t say that, I says, I’m 
so blessed that I could cry. We took a swig, swallowed. Hittin 
the sack?—the inspector hiccupped. I tell him: I’m not sleepy, 
I got enough sleep in hospitals. Gonna brush your teeth? 
Pardon? Your teeth, I am askin, he asks, are you gonna brush? 
I apologize, I—pas, I don’t need to. Coincidence, he said, both 
jaws ain’t mine. So whose?—I stared. Official issue, on suction 
cups, said the lieutenant, here. And he took them out. I looked. 
I did like them a great deal—white, sharp, as if a bonesetter 
prescribed; here’s what your health services do. Go ahead, 
try them, try them, don’t be shy, the lieutenant encouraged. I 
inserted. How are they, do they fit? Like in a pharmacy, lieutenant, as if they sculpted these details for Ilya. It’s a gift, he 
yelled. Oh my, are you nuts, how’s that possible, such presents. 
Ain’t you my kin, he kept yellin, don’t I have the right to offer 
my bro the teeth? Suck and remember. Well, what a benefactor, 
you helped me out, I yelled. Forget it, the deputy grinned to 
me, empty-mouthed, just play. I started singin, playin—swiftly, 
swiftly, as if escapin from the Siberian mines. The inspector 
doesn’t give a spit about close quarters—he broke into a bop, 
keeps shakin his charms. In our blessed memory’s early years 
we called such fellows blubberlubbers: No problem, they all 
responded without fail. I was performin “Carousel,” probably 
in the rhythm of the squabble of the wheels. A filigree “Carousel”: Shake your lure, I cheered him on, chevelure. And in the 
same rhythm a fortunate thought came to Ilya that, say, he unexpectedly put in the gratis teeth. Ah, I put in the new teeth, eh, 
the new teeth I put in fast, I put them in myself, and so forth. 
To the accompaniment of squeakin wheel flanges, a thoughtful 
invalidual will mill over all kinds of stuff durin a long trip from 
an infirmary to the Tower Junction; he will mill it over—and 
there will be flour. And it was rockin on switches. My bopper 
bopped ’til he dropped: He crashed on the berth and started 
sawin wood. So I took off his tall boots lined with fur, threw 
them for good memories into the knapsack, polished off what 
was left in the flask—for the road—and I greet the sailor in 
the car’s gangway: On leave to *maman*? Durin our cabotage, 
he says, the followin emergency occurred. On the Mariupol 
dry-cargo ship served two chums, two stokers—the second 
and the first—and the sea spread in front of them quite widely. 
But when the second, out of the most sincerest considerations 
for his attachment to the first’s gal from Anapa, secretly added 
to his antrasite some kind of bad substance and left, they were 
cruisin precisely to Balaklava, to the factory of bubbly water. 
The comrade left, so this one opens the door to the furnace 
with a habitual bump—and it’s all over. That is, when he 
swooshed his shovel into the ash pit and shoved it in up to, as 
they say in them fleets, its turnip and started stirrin with the 
shovel, then everythin went kaboom—a total nightmare. And 
the flame illuminated him. At that time the other stoker runs 
into the boiler room, and this one says to him: Stand from under, we’re havin a malfunction, our valves and all their flaps are 
gone—for that reason, gimme a cig, bro, stick it in my kisser, so 
the smoke comes out of me. I don’t mind givin, his bro teases 
him, only with what, I would like to know, do you intend to 
hold it? I looked, he says, and it seems I have no palms, they got 
torn off—a tear glimmers in his eye—and it’s a done deal. And 
I, he says, said then, a stoker to a stoker: Darn, you call yourself 
a pal, but stokerly speakin, you are a mop after that, not a sailor, 
and your mother’s a bulkhead.