---
chapter-number: "13"
title: Pictures from an Exhibition
language: en
---

The hoarfrost—may pass. The chickens—may walk 
over the sand, looking surprised that they leave 
prints with their chicken feet. Not to like these birds, 
but to like watching how they leave prints on the wet sand, 
without suspecting it, without suspecting anything. The chatterboxes could be heard. They kept shouting to each other but 
did not halloo because they were walking together, in a tight 
flock. Moira, who was spending her overripe years on the 
bench in the front yard, also heard the voices. Then she put 
aside her knitting needles, with which she had been picking in 
her ears since morning, jumped up, looked carefully in that direction, and cawed: They are leading her. A ball of gray wool 
rolled off her knees, hopped on the flower bed, and, crushing 
the anemic anemones, rolled somewhere, having turned into a 
ball of courting vipers. The barracks—may wait. Stepping into 
the space of April delight, they kept saying: They are leading 
her; she has had enough swinging. The complex, mixed smell 
of roll-ups and state-rolled *papirosy* may soar above the gathering of the interested. Not to know anybody here. The delinquent tenant, living in the truncated room under the stairs, was 
outside; he may hang out at the water reservoir, near the boathouses, begging shameless oarswomen for candy wrappers. 
Brawny trainers, people of middle age, humiliated the 
scrounger. She was walking with her hair loose, having thrown 
her head back to see only the azure. Her white *demi-saison* coat 
is unbuttoned. But tomorrow it will get warmer—and she is 
already in a sarafan. And the witches—in black. The highway is 
violet, covered with purple puddles, and if we continue with 
the colors, with impressions—then the tiny young leaves, on 
the background of which the walk is taking place, convey to 
us the impression of green smoke. Two ghastly skin-and-bones 
are holding her under her arms. The others are walking in a 
circle, guarding, and all are trying to touch. For a long time, for 
several moments, he has been observing what was happening 
there; he has been observing it from his window for several years. 
At first—just once; later—occasionally and then—constantly. 
Whenever, wherever: the black jubilant centipede, the hunchbacked semibasement wood louse. The time of year and day is 
changing, the long dresses of the flock are turning into longskirted sacks. The decorations and lighting and the footwear of 
the extras are changing, but their gestures, grimaces, and gait 
do not show any variations. When it is October and the melted 
butter of the slush spreads on the stale zwieback of the blacktop; whether there is fog, and mildew, God’s false milky dew, 
oozes down the gutters of the old women’s wrinkles; if it is late, 
dark, and the pieces of glass from broken bottles glimmer neither in the harbor nor in the trash of garbage piles; or when 
January puts wind-and-snow gags in the thin-lipped mouths of 
the babblers; or February-crooked-paths, having outfitted 
itself with the pincers of snowstorms, tries to tear out the sinewy tongues of the prophetic tattlers; or when it is summer, 
but it is cloudy, and the stratocumuli, udder-shaped, grow, ripen 
above the site—when and whether, and if, and wherever, and 
while—then, therefore, and consequently, it follows that no 
one will notice the approach of the expedition, and even if one 
notices, one will not caw, and if one does caw, one will not be 
heard, and if one is heard, there will be no response: Cozying 
up in the warm daze of kerosene, fearing polyps and glands, the 
barracks will not meet her, will not look out. Only you, the apprentice-enchanter, pretending to be the admirer of the Celsius scale but actually evaluating the universe—more precisely, 
one of its paths—every time you will discover them again on 
their way to the plywood dwelling. If the light dimmed, went 
out, the ne’er-do-wells would light the candle ends. You will 
see them—poor, shaggy, and ugly; their features are revolting. 
However, when the procession came down from the railroad 
embankment, came closer to the gardens populated by stooping scarecrows, when it stepped on the solid ground of the yard 
flattened by children’s games and printing chicken feet, then 
everything achieved by the blabbermouths in the case of overcoming distances turned into purest fiction. Not thinking 
about going back, not making even a step backward, the procession has already returned, transferred, moved to the starting position, toward the horizon, and clearly not noticing what 
happened, continues what had been started—walks, marches, 
goes forward, dragging and pushing, urging and scolding the 
one whose head is thrown back and crowned with a quite 
tainted—but from afar, through the cleansing crystal of empty 
space, astonishingly fresh ribbon. And when, many Aprils later, 
one of the disobedient pupils of the courier institute will become an accidental witness of the Sisyphean gliding next to 
the river-cesspool, it, despite all its particulars, will not seem to 
the inspired youngster like a frightening revelation. He will 
juxtapose, compare both marches, and note their similar and 
different features. Both of them—you will assure yourself, having turned with the help of the flannel into something resembling a cocoon and going to the official dormitory sleep—both 
of them are symptoms of terminal temporal disease that distorted the natural flow of events and years, the flow of being, 
the course of the flow. And winter did visit—all in cheviot 
coats and thaws. It came, feverishly breathing with the bowels 
of the bed table; it was a sum of smells—*asidol*, paste, wax, a 
dirt-cheap remedy, called without beating around the bushes a 
remedy against sores, soap, and, of course, Maria biscuits, sent 
by their namesake in a registered package. You would have preferred if winter wafted with Matthiola, you would have desired 
the aroma of Hawaiian amalia, but you did not wince, did not 
turn away in disgust, fearing that it would get offended and 
pass, while you wanted to remember it as well as possible—so 
the next day, in spring, having left the cocoon before the bugle 
of reveille, you would offer the meeting to pencil and gouache. 
It came and kept breathing. With an ashen mane, strange, and 
clinking with horseshoes made of ice. And to wake up in flowers 
and cicadas, under the camel-embroidered sheet that suddenly 
became too small. And to wake up in an Egyptian sarcophagus, 
in a hunting hideout made of tree branches, in the tower 
of Monsieur Flaubert, in the one in Pisa, in a hollow of a 
thousand-year-old baobab, having changed into a large longeared koala, hanging with its ears down. And to wake up meaning nothing, as a handful of ash from Tushino, firmly jammed 
into a Tula mortar. Maria is leaving; it is dawn. To crack, to fry, 
and to eat three eggs. To feed the crumbs to two tweeting fugel. 
They will finish pecking, clean their feathers, and tweet again. 
And other birds, beyond the window, were flying in the direction of the sun, and some were sitting on whitish branches, and 
others still were trying to print on the roseate frozen sand, but 
unfortunately they were leaving no tracks. Looking askance at 
the factory, at the smokes from distant plants, and at the laborer who, straining himself, pushed along the planks the overtime wagtail with junk, the celestial body was coming up. *A Visit of the Ragpicker*. The genre-painter-wanderer is not 
needed and not known. The cook of an impoverished aristocrat is treating with some leftovers the suitor who dropped in 
for an hour. They are having tea in the kitchen at the sticky table. The door to the backyard is partially open; a cart loaded 
with noble junk can be seen there. Right beyond the backyard 
begins the backdrop. Behind it, a drinking joint, a *schlagbaum*, 
*verstas* of blurry road, a jail, Siberia, and a cemetery are lined 
up. The visitor is poorly groomed, unbuttoned, with a face like 
a trough; his visage bears traces of all kinds of excesses, while 
the cook is by and large untidy, and her master, the emaciated 
graying dotard, hiding for some reason in the larder and gingerly looking through his lorgnon at the laborer (the most 
faded corner of the painting), having slightly pushed aside the 
filthy curtain with his refined, long-fingered hand, her master—in a nightcap and some kind of cheap undergarment with 
frayed lace of jabot and cuffs—is a total slob. And should we not 
wake up at his ancestral estate? In the library? On the ornate 
settee? On the best days of its owner? As him in person? The 
works of the departed overachievers may start glimmering in 
the bookcases with the gold stamping of their spines, as soon 
as Selene, the brainless child of deaf and mute dusk, seemingly 
having swallowed itself and astonished and proud of it, Selene 
with the features of a dictatorial idiot, gulps with her sardonic 
mouth, with the pores of her highborn face the darkness of the 
study, and the light may dominate, and everything that is able 
to reflect, mirror, shine, and glimmer—all this may glimmer, 
shine, mirror, and reflect. But then the stirring of poplars, the 
rustling of their meaty leaves may forecast the sudden morning, and the moon may already start fading and falling back, 
tumbling backward, like during an attack of epilepsy, rolling off 
the roofs as a not-yet-eaten round bun, dropping behind them, 
dripping into the corrugated auricle, where big-cheeked pipers 
pipe on Saturdays, plunging into the park of cultural recreation, into clusters of planted plane trees and the stirring 
lindens—rolling off, plunging, and spinning among them like 
a Ferris wheel. The morning dawn dethroned, diminished the 
moon; this way its fame was ending. The heavenly light penetrated your closed eyelids, and your face was soaring. But even 
in those moments of your youth, filled with lofty visions, you, 
then a common apprentice courier, would not ever dare to assume that a time will come—and you will become a whipper-in. 
The early brooms and the scratching of bread trays being taken 
out of the crates of the bread carriage, and the squeal of the 
same trays, sliding diagonally into the underworld: the bread 
of someone’s early years. And someone of advanced years was 
walking by. He was walking slowly. He was walking, afflicted by 
shortness of breath and by foul language. He was walking for a 
long time. But even he passed by. And a while later the first 
electric clunker escaped from the purple fingers of Aurora—it 
was gliding over the rails, hissing with bearings and trolleys, 
and: But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad, walks o’er the 
dew of yon high eastward hill—was posted on the route-board 
in hieroglyphics corresponding to the occasion. But the transport-absence of people did not last long: The coffeepot has not 
had time to boil yet, when along the entire street the self-propelled and chock-full-filled equipages already started making 
noise. The passengers’ appearance seemed disagreeable, like 
the smell of the open, but as ill luck would have it, jammed 
umbrellas, which from the frowning point of view so vividly 
resemble armpits of archaeopteryxes and which the provincials keep sticking in each other’s noses, having burst in, enthusiastically wet, at the stop named Theater, and having burst 
out, enthusiastically dry, after the premiere that opened another Aesopian season. Inconspicuous cricket of the outskirts, 
in October you are particularly mysterious. Sad-eyed, you listlessly soar as a patchy mist, walking quietly in the evening from 
the swings, from the slipways, from the waves of motorboats, 
gray like the wet sailcloth. You appear, walk out, step on the 
young thistle before the highway, then—on the highway, 
then—on the young thistle beyond it, on the cozy gully of Neglect, on beloved, hated—cross out what is not needed—fences 
and roofs, in order to dreamily, and blindly, and coolly mask it 
all, shield it, cover it, hide it from strangers’ beholding, swirling, 
wriggling, and writhing noiselessly, and as if you were squashed 
between five and six o’clock. You are shielding it, covering it, 
hiding it, and if one asks from what, you will not answer; perhaps you do not know the answer? No, you do know, but you 
will not answer—and that is all. You will only answer someday, 
after going through your youth, after grieving, after burning up, 
but, as before, being envious of strangers in that old place, you 
will answer to everything. Foolish girl, an orphan and a child of 
orphans of this land, I am calling you—look back. Do you 
know how bright and clean is your unwashed face and how 
many earthly sorrows of your sisters are combined in its unearthly features? Lonely and lone among all the lone and lonely 
who are countless, burn, burn brightly—there, at the cobblestone highway; here, at the crossroads of turnouts, and at the 
dead end, where the burdock grows. Burn with white light, sinless flower, burn, bitter, burn, timid, burn, enchanting. Burn for 
Yakov, burn for everyone who is rushing to your light in confusion. From Saint George to the Intercession, from the river’s 
standing to the river’s flowing and from the black fields to the 
white roads sheltering autumn—burn through the summer, 
burn through the winter, and as a white shepherd’s star spread 
everywhere gentle light, your secret charity. Be merry—your 
image is perennial, not involved in anything, and out of this 
world. There, on the cobblestone highway, here, on the crossroads of turnouts, burn incessantly in the circle of the funereal 
old women’s heads that resemble firebrands—gray and smoldering. On that cemetery or on that hill—show white from a 
distance, burn rising up, captured by the army of crosses similar 
to warriors mounting brownish mounds. Come merry—to 
proclaim on the entire firmament your frenetic balabala. And 
the dusks cometh and the dark flyers gather toward the night 
into black flocks—and only the boundless spaces up high pay 
heed to this answer.