---
chapter-number: "14"
title: Accordin to Ilya Petrikeich
language: en
---

Bell-bottoms, a fleet cap with a crab, a pea coat 
with anchors—what a picture. And he presents 
himself—sailor Albatrosov, discharged without 
hands from the dry-cargo carrier to the ball of landlocked destiny; and what year did You launch from Your mother’s port? 
I also introduce myself. To our harbor, he says, ocean ships 
kept steerin, to drop anchor, I says, when their job was done, 
in the tavern, he says, merry sailors kept on cheerin, drinkin, 
I says, to the health of their valiant ataman. That’s all true, nodded the Black-fleeter, but for me you better touch upon love, 
adjust the music a little bit. Sure, even a hundred times. And I 
offer to the attention of the listener the cherished and sorrowful song. Chrysanthemums stopped bloomin long ago in the 
park, but despair’s still abloom in my own dear heart. My Albatros dipped his rudder, started clearin his throat, the dry cough 
is shakin the seaman. And just then comes a way station, and a 
Ukrainian dawdler is peddlin mill cakes—periphery, outskirts. 
I jerked the door open and screamed: Hey, partner, do you 
need teeth? ’Cuz I overspent durin my ride. Oh, I do, she says, 
I do, without them I’m at my wits’ end. I’m lettin both jaws 
go for three rubles, just look how white—like a bone. I did let 
them go and became a lisper again. It’s nothin, we’ll manage, 
for the grateful chum we’d even give an eye for analysis. The express moved forward and we moved to its restaurant: Munch to 
stop the hunger’s rage, take your meds from early age. We captured by abordage two reserved seats and ordered everythin 
delightful—even the fish sticks. And he reports: You have upset my livers with them chrysanthemums, I’m a son of a witch, 
when I was a novice sailor, I was based on the trainin pontoon, 
on a cracked barge, and I did not even have a chance to blink, 
when on the park’s bald spots with all kinds of carousels began 
to loom, he says, a foolhardy mamuasel—a gal not too appealin 
but always willin. At first I used to hang out with her alone, 
but later I would bring those mates who did not have to stand 
watch, and it was exactly she who was tormented by this song. 
And when we were raisin the anchors, I got away for an hour 
from all hands on deck—and to the girl. For farewell she gives 
me a piece of paper: She wrote down all the stanzas and put the 
address on the back—the lane, the buildin, and the room. As 
if to say: Don’t forget, send snapshots. But durin a campaign 
there ain’t much to write about, and it’s forbidden too, and 
later we all got placed into school’s custody, and there we’re 
even less into letters, a complete rat race: either the solitary 
confinement, or scrubbin, or crammin the Morse, and with cadets there are scrapes ’cuz of hussies—it’s no joke. No, seafarin 
soul, mine did not leave any address, just left God only knows 
where, and now try to claim damages. We tasted misfortune 
with her, lived together in her pad quite a while, but did not 
stockpile nothin except Yakov—a smartie but, nevertheless, 
a dummy, and even then she hinted that not I am his happy 
father, from a switchman, supposedly, she got like that, ’cuz 
she was servin at the switch, and in the beginnin was on duty 
round the clock. Where and how, I tried to learn, at what hour? 
Well, she esplains, on a pile of discarded wood chips, next to 
the storeroom, where they used to eat suppers. Suppers or not 
suppers, who’s gonna check, but I was troubled a lot. Orya was 
cuttin me without a knife, but altogether, I underline, it was 
bearable, and it only turned unbearable when she advanced to 
a dispecher there and started actin as tactlessly as can be. A hair 
pick like any other, and yours, made of tortoiseshell, I lost on 
the rails. Well, and this one here, how on earth?—I was askin, 
feelin completely cheated but not ready for a clash. She kept 
givin me runarounds, insolent to the max—I found it on the 
rails too. Your vale is like the railroad, came to my mind, but 
you yourself—you’re a slutty broad, you ain’t mine, your most 
strongest friendship ain’t with me, not in this here hovel, not 
on this here reclinin device, but on those same rails; they even 
managed to make you Yashka on the ties. I started wondrin.


And the dawn, I’ll say frankly, is catchin fire stronger than any 
dawn on the other side of the Wolf, although You, most likely, 
can hardly understand what we, the inhabitants, call Beyond 
the Wolf. That’s why I am rowin, a water strider, to the other 
shore. Briskly-briskly I row, sprightly-sprightly, and the masts 
are bendin and they creak, but the Itil outdid my brisk pace 
with its width, and the day midges are already at the heels of 
the swarms of mornin moskitos. I reach it before lunch, and 
my scull like a fish jumps out on the sand at full speed. I celebrated my achievement with Your second smoke and I’m hobblin along on my squeakers, observin the growth of lilies. I 
confirm: They toil not, they spin not, and yet they’re dressed 
spic-and-span. But skimmin thru these here sketches of mine, 
You have the right to exclaim in protest. I am sensin Your puzzlement, I’m not a knucklehead, even if I’m disfigured, but let’s 
agree once and forever: Crutches are crutches, but mushrooms—nuts. And I cannot, due to the first, whilst they ain’t present, 
and havin abandoned the trips for the third and the second, sit 
like my namesake from Murom without stirrin for thirty years 
plus three more of travel restrictions. Thank goodness, Krylobyl visited me and, feelin sympathy, enlightened. Ilya Petrikeich, he declares cleverly, do you insist that the time fuctions 
everywhere in unison? I said: I do not insist. I have nothin to 
hide, Sidor Fatherovich; when I insist, then I do insist, 
but if I don’t—then right away: I don’t insist and that’s it, 
why drag it on. And I told him squarely: You may be offended, 
complain, you have the right, but I am givin you my word: Yes, 
I do not insist. Look, Krylobyl, this know-it-all, instructs, let’s 
take not time, but an ordinary river. Well, let’s. And turn your 
imagination, he pesters, that it practically doesn’t move in the 
backwater; duckweed and grasses are stranglin it, while at the 
channel line it rushes; and the time fuctions the same way, he 
esplained, in Gorodnishche it moves, approximately, like a 
stroke of a swift’s wing, in Bydogoshch, not too fast and not 
too slow, and in the woods, a total peace and quiet. For that 
reason, mind my assurances that the theft, of which you are the 
victim, took place so far only in our beloved town and nowhere 
else, and on the other side nobody even heard about it. That 
means, if you move over there—everythin will be right again. I 
took all this under consideration and started goin on the future 
scow to bygone years. The main difficulty—how to get to the 
moorin posts. Regardless of graphs and paragraphs, around 
here there was and still is a severe shortage of volunteers to assist the defectives, that’s why we are the chosen ones. And for 
that reason, in adventures of the given kind, I, a good chap, am 
aided only by the familiar to You thrice-removed relatives. I 
have rowed across and hobble aimlessly, havin trampled lameness with lameness, and You—here, in the present—are 
studyin this Volapuke. You’ve gone up on the porch to get 
some air and turned Your imagination to me; You shield your 
eyes: Our scamp has a finger in every pie—I see the grinder 
Beyond the Wolf. No, I see You there, ’cuz not I am there but 
You. In a word, we both are right. After all, since we are on different sides, we also have a different geography: You are Beyond the Wolf and I am too. Well, so she misplaced her attention to the tot, returns tanked up, and I—I’m a scandal-maker. 
And one day Orina tells me straight on: Say, let’s divide our 
toys in half. Ilya has nothin to divide, all his toys from the belongins kind, of plates-foot-bindins type—are one or two and 
he’s ready to go. I loaded the ammunition into my indestructible snatch-it-all, into a sack, bowed to the cheater, kissed sonny, 
probably not my own, rolled down the banisters to the basement, and opened under the stairs a kind of a fur-makin workshop, I became a sort of a chillin furrier. But actually I was 
makin a livin by paintin and sellin various inflatable balloons 
from a pharmacy and inventin squeak-squaks. There’s no doubt 
that I slept there too, and slightly later, to avoid tiffs with the 
powers that be, obtained a patent. How the heck—it’s on the 
bottom of the list now—but I gathered as many orders as cat’s 
tears, so I was forced to beg on local trains and make repairs to 
this or that old thing; I also became a whiz on a few instruments. Or somethin else—one may wander now and then at 
dawn to the dump—one may look, but I’m just a spook, a fidgety bum. Widely and freely, I dare to mention, spread these 
malodorous fields; occasionally, you’ll go far-far in search of 
joys—and you’ll get lost. When you’re workin hard, everythin 
drags by imperceptibly; it’s already noon, and if not the frosty 
sparks, then skylarks. You’ll ascend the garbage mound to get 
some rest—your spirit will flare up: A tip-top site! Look 
around: In the west, in the valley, the ragpicker scrapes the garbage with her rake; in the north, a three-pawed bitch scours for 
some grub; in the east, a sergeant-reservist rummages in the 
stream—raves about assemblin a motorcycle out of spare 
parts; and in the south, some riffraff scavenges for cigarette 
butts. Peace, calm, nobody’s doin nothin to nobody, ’cuz here a 
man is a man to man, nothin more; and the smokes of the 
fatherland are everywhere, like durin that uprisin—garbage 
smolders softly, a real panorama wherever you’d turn your 
head. And such closeness to it pinches inside, that to return 
home—to hell with it! Our inhabitant is attracted to the expanses of his land and he needs nothin else. In those same 
quarters I put together a decent lidrary, so to speak, that is, a 
collection of multicolored tops from various mixtures: colognes, perfumes, You know what. In this sense, invaluable help 
by her advices and greetins used to gimme that western ragpicker, auntie with meat on her bones, well-bred and with experience, and she was sixty-plus years old—a delicacy, no 
more no less. It’s an adventure from the past, and I will not hide 
what was: I had a fleetin crush on her, as also happened, incidently, with her grand-ward, or similar to it, for which, of 
course, in retrospect, I blame myself, if that’s required. Ladies’ 
flesh is a great temptation; that certain thing—we yearn for it 
but can’t be held accountable. The same here: Everythin started 
almost like when you just fool around. She kept objectin, 
avoided me, frowned, but if you dig more deeply—there’s no 
difference. In the barracks they used to say that she’s nuts, she’s 
like that from birth, but personally I wouldn’t claim nothin exceptional. The only thing that her head was really rather absurdly small, but the ragpicker assured—it’ll ripen to the weddin, it will heal; well, if it’ll ripen, it’ll ripen, the caretaker 
knows better. One day she sends her girlie with some hide for 
me to scrape—and I got excited in my declinin fate. Only don’t 
look for faults, Fomich, in the beginnin I curbed my curiosity, 
what things are like with her, that is, at her age, You know, well, 
so accidently I put the bolt in the lock, in secret, that is, from 
myself. Later I reckon—devil has his ways—I’ll take a gamble, 
not everythin is done by calculation, like with grandmas, it 
would be nice with their grandkids every now and then, spontaneously. And the incorrigible happened, I deployed myself 
with the adolescent in excitement and at the heat of the moment. We agreed to meet; sometimes we please each other under the stairs, other times under the bowroat. After several 
months, on the side, from a friendly guitarist, to whom I am 
eternally grateful for teachin me how to read music, I learn that 
some rivermen secretly cleave my teenager. I turned a blind 
eye—she’s not made of soap, she won’t foam away, and they’re 
doin what the young do, that’s their right—they’ll cleave and 
leave. Orina worried me, her contacts led me off the rails, and 
feelin lonely without her, I grieved under the scow, crawlin on 
the rags that should be burned so they won’t stink. And the 
ticklin trash like flies fed on the junk and made its habit to 
walk over the exposed places. At first they didn’t bother me; 
on the contrary, I derived some pleasure from them, but closer 
to the Assumption they ate me alive, and my encouragement 
ended. And in the hole of the rowlock there lived a wolf spider. The entire bottom, like heavens above, he entwined with 
his web. I kept catchin the insects and throwin them into his 
nets. How neatly he, unscrupulous, kept takin out the souls of 
these creatures, yikes! Pasha, my comin, my Spider, wrote Pyotr to his nephew from the village, I haven’t seen an event 
more borin than January without yeast, so bring it hook or 
crook. In my heart I believe, he continued, in my heart I know 
you won’t lemme down, but the mind is weak, gets tempted: 
You will not bring it, after all; woe is us, tipplers, in that case. 
Precisely then, Pavel sends me the news by the Fenist. Ilyusha, 
sir, our prophet, I and Pyotr here got into our heads to stockpile some home brew, and ’cuz you wish us well even without 
that, and helped us with the letter *zhe*, won’t you loan us, 
besides that, some money, as I will liken the yeast Beyond the 
Wolf to everythin marvles, and winter without it I will compare 
to spring without top boots, or to the same winter but without 
*valenki*; like a dreadful nightmare, he exploits, will be the 
flutterin above us, apostles, so please. I procured some paper, 
sand, dipped the pen into the inkwell and started gazin with 
admiration outside, where the lonesome snowbabe, sculpted 
by me, broke into a serious drip. On the calendar—the end of 
the side-warmer, but wait a bit with grinnin, March may still 
force you to sell your last shirt. Stop sendin the Fenist in vain, 
I answered Pavel, you and your uncle won’t get money from 
Ilya, so far I’m not dispensin money but healins, and these 
only to those that show respect, and even more not to be guzzled away: ’Nuf of gettin pickled; but before I, maybe, send 
you money, before that, you’ll deliver to me by a courier my 
accessories. Which? Well, those that you and the saints like 
you filched in December, havin chosen for this the confusion 
of darkness and the hubbub of the blizzie. And I passed on to 
the whipper-in the ultimat to take care of and solve our discord in secrecy, without proclaimin it from the housetops, by 
agreein that neither the wolf nor the hound, but somehow 
neither this nor that, somethin like the mornin evenin, and 
that I, bein amenable, would hope for the return of one instead of two. And the reply: Wipe clean, he offends, your bodily beacons and watch out so you won’t get tossed accidentally 
into the outside darkness. And then I decided to undertake 
this here supplication to You, and to forget the Spider and his 
request, havin punished him with a chill rebuff. What’s been 
said—we will do, but let’s not forget—or else the night will 
remind us—how with his trunk he kept takin out the souls of 
the flies under the boat.


And I started wondrin. Orya, my Orya, they also kept chafin 
you all over the hollows in the same manner. On weekdays of 
the paycheck or on Fridays of the advance, in the famed alders beyond the tracks, unknown to me trainees, your darin 
buddies from railroad vocational schools, were audaciously 
carousin with you. You are quite weak, Orina Ignatyevna, as 
it became clear, between Your legs, You ain’t indifferent to 
sweets, and not a hair pick You’ve lost on the rails but honor. 
For a faceted tumbler of the poison from Kashin you caressed 
them every which way, you wanton shrew. Why, I would quietly wanna find out, you never fondled Ilya like that? And a 
certain bush grew over there, inconspicuous, but thick and 
close by, and durin lengthy twilights I observed indecencies 
from there; You were a Sodomite, little mother. Afterward I 
would go to the nutty one, tryin to recoup my losses, but with 
her—like with a doll—she would look at me as if she was 
made of lead, not indulgin me in any whim. On the weekday 
of railroad paycheck or on Friday of the advance, I knocked 
back a few on account of someone’s generosity, picked up a 
piece of iron by the depot, and I’m waitin in the famous alders 
beyond the tracks. And these rascals, shorties sixteen boyish 
years old, appear and lead my workin girl on the execution 
meadow of love. I decided to wait—let them begin; then, filled 
with more courage, I will attack from behind the kurgan like a 
perfidious infidel. Quickly, five of them got pickled and started 
doin what each was good at. Eh, I think, ready or not, here I 
come. But then I reckon: If you rush the stuff you will make 
them laugh, you’ll scare them inadvertently; I better hold my 
fire. And from nothin to do I keep rereadin a ticket that I also 
picked up, with a number, truly, 8,420 to be exact, suitable for 
travel last year to such an unforgettable land as the Meadow 
Saturday. This cardboard piece affected Ilya, affected him a 
great deal. Just imagine, Fomich, the Meadow Saturday. That 
is, not only Saturday but in addition framed by meadows, perhaps even water ones. And streams of concertina are splashin 
over them. And the weekenders, in ironed clothes, and even 
with canes, keep strollin, beamin about somethin appropriate. Everythin is calm, no mug-thrashin, only the coachmen 
swear at water carriers, but even that with yawns. And if they 
decide to sit for a while in the shadow with company—retire, 
gentlemen, into the bushes, to special stands, and relax to your 
health. I pictured for myself this bliss, so unlike our places, and 
I make a commitment: Whatever happens, regardless of any 
scrapes or anythin else—to pay Meadow Saturday a visit in 
the future existence. And I tied a knot. On my necktie. And 
when together with the sailor Albatrosov we whistled ourselves all hands on deck, havin abruptly abandoned the buffet 
car ’cuz our funds ran out, and we moved to the foksel, our 
steamboat was dockin at the proper embarcadero. We disembarked, looked around, and lingered in that hole a couple of 
weeks—what boonies and wastes! With no money and desperate, we hanged around there like jerboas, and havin conversations with the locals, we were talkin to them, sayin: And 
you dare to call yourself Meadow Saturday. We scrounged half 
a ruble for smokes and followin the dictates of our hearts plodded down to Gorodnishche to have some fun and, after arrivin, 
we inquire: How’s that young life of yours? So-so, they answer, 
we’re gettin by little by little. And how are you managin with 
chasers? Well, we almost always manage to fill our stomachs 
with some innards. So after our arrival, we got to be there, and 
havin a surplus of ailments, started hangin about. On the day 
of railroad paycheck or the day of the advance, I’ve had a gulp 
in the joint near the station with rail workers-tipplers—and I 
stand jealous in the bush with the danglin iron. How I jumped 
out, how I leaped out with the hatchet: Aha, I threaten them, 
aha! And they: Grab him, grab him! Brace yourself, they 
yell, such-and-such jerk! Four of them caught up with me 
and knocked me down as I fled. And they kept stompin on 
me, askin: How about that, did we catch you fair and square, 
you mother-sucker? You did catch me, I cry, cap-bands, you 
banged me up, hammers in button loops, as fair and square as 
can be. I try to break free—but they hold fast. They pounded 
me like Sidor’s goat, got me filthy all over and—I see—they 
are draggin me, the poor wretch, along the gray slag with my 
mug down. And they’ve pulled me up the embankment, spiders, and, relentless, are clampin me to the rail with barbed 
wire. Why do it, kiddos, I agonized, am I some kind of a fox 
cub to you? Tenacious, with their crafty mitts they completely 
squash me on the stinky ties, deviously don’t lemme breathe. 
They had fastened me like a *valenok* to the speed skate—crosswise and leavin no slack, with linesman’s pliers, and then 
they split, chickens. I’m also scared—I’m waitin for the express. And—as it is customary—I started refreshin my past: 
How did I live this time, decently or not? I reckoned this and 
that, and the characteristic turned out mostly not bad. I had the 
reputation of a serious, respectable gentleman, had not committed, as they say, highway robbery. And when the embers of 
the heavenly matters were already pourin down from above, 
then, in spite of everythin, this strange Orya appeared to help. 
She kept callin the obnoxious Ilya a poor fox, started to unwind the wires—and was shakin like a leaf. And I felt with 
my whole shoulder blades that my express is comin close, 
and the wires are many and thick. It had but a few meters left, 
it was humiliatin with its lanterns, made noise. I said: Orya, 
sweetie, so long, step aside. And she: And maybe together? 
Not with me, I negate, you stick with the cap-bands. And she: 
Don’t be cross about that, with them urchins I just so—to 
have a little fun, to visit for a while—but my joy was bein with 
you, I felt with you like earth with grass, she says, and forget 
my excesses—everythin passed, healed, sharp teeth, long tail. 
You have mixed it up, little mother, you’re confusin somethin, 
seriously, do I take after a fox? The magpie is sick, she claims, 
the crow is sick too, she says, and Ilya is healthy and glad, she 
casts the spell. I jerked, jerked, pulled, but partially did not 
succeed. It swooped, mangled, hot, and my hands-legs scattered all over. The battalion of about-goners grew larger; commander, receive the reinforcements. And the infirmary. Havin 
not found this and that in the makeup of my body, I came to a 
boil and demanded consolation. A hulk of a doc in a cap floats 
in. To my question, Where is my friend?—he says the miserly: 
She’s done for. To the bonesetter: Go, heal Thyself, I permit 
myself not to believe You—just look what You’ve thought up; 
I made a row. And my treatment went on. There were newspapers, slippers, shavin was provided.


And I recalled how, braggin about his sharpened blades, Gury 
kept tootin his horn among the masters in the co-op that so far 
he missed the sad chore of racin races against the whipper-in; 
I’ll blow by, he claimed, as if he was standin in place. As a result, they started arguin, put wine in the kitty. Havin received 
the notification-declaration, the whipper-in approves. They 
agreed to run as usual, in the dark, and, possessin the mental 
hypervision, I see them like now—one in clothes patched, the 
other in mismatched. At the takeoff, they clawed nose by nose, 
and they aspired to run almost exactly from the pant-washin 
deck to the Sloboda tributary, to the Tavern Island number 
two—and back. And they rushed along, cuttin the ice with 
their skates. The whirlin snow dusted the tracks of their heroic 
deed, and the fishes not as much saw the athletes as heard them, 
but in the near future perhaps they’ll have a chance to taste one 
of the participants; come and pray, large and small fishie. A few 
verstas before the turn, Gury began gainin and the whipper-in 
fallin behind, but Gury aimed slightly more to the right than he 
should and fell into a polynya, an ice hole in the area of the fairway. It does not freeze there under any conditions, and quite a 
number of sleepyhead coachmen and lunatic speed skaters fell 
in over there. They failed to account for Gury too; he plopped 
in and right away got sucked under the ice, so the dog master on his part just started sobbin. They decided to hold the 
wake for the wolf-slayer without his factual presence; nobody 
was in the mood to wait until he floats up somewhere or until 
the kiddos pull him out with a dragnet: In most of their cases 
our folks embrace the lack of time. And so they gathered at the 
gravedigger’s. You know Beyond the Itil, here it’s impossible 
to put an end, even if relative, to quarrels and disputes: They 
started arguin about love—say, who she is, that thoroughly 
beautiful madame. Everyone stuck to his guns; one, like Vasily 
Karaban, that Everlastin Existens dropped in to visit, the 
other—on the contrary: discords, bad harvest, events. And I, 
stayin pas, don’t butt in, keep neutral. But to You—to You I 
admit, obviously not to tell the others, since even without that 
they consider Ilya a chucklehead. Why, what on earth for did 
she persuade the medical four-eyes to powder my brains—I 
can’t make sense of it. And now she’s remorseful, searches 
along the entire river, ain’t there among you the one, you know, 
who. They are lyin that no, as they themselves are head over 
heels in love: We don’t know who you are concerned about, 
but all of us wouldn’t mind bein with you. And Gury’s also like 
them, even though he’s a Chud. Oh my precious, he pleaded, 
our reach ain’t narrow—it’s wide, and where this youngster is 
nestin, I have no clue, I only realize that if you popped in to 
my place for a short while, then the road of my life, narrow as 
a sharpened blade, would become as wide as this reach. She 
stayed, they say, with him for a while on the eve of his decisive 
heat with the head dog master, but even that was more than 
the supplicant could handle. I am worried: She is my intended 
demise, and she, Orya, is lookin for me, Fomich, pinin. And I 
don’t know what measures to undertake—to get lost without 
a trace or to hobble to her with a confession. But neither this 
nor that is possible right now. Krylobyl—that’s whom I trust, 
whom I praise—Krylobyl admonished the wardens: You, light 
of your own eyes, return to the cripple what’s the cripple’s. 
They started scurryin, but the sought for completely vanished. 
Perhaps it was drunk away, perhaps thrown behind a bush of 
brittle willow, perhaps it simply floated down the stream. But 
for Ilya it makes no difference, put it back where you took 
it, Ilya needs it here and now. He got stuck, he got stuck for 
good without them. Some have Sloboda, some Overbrowears, 
some Gorodnishche, but he—he is sittin here like a dog on 
vomit. Just look, as long as we’re talkin about it, how many of 
them hold a watch in a circle around our establishment. Do 
You think they are waitin for alms? No way, there’s nothin they 
could hope for, so far they didn’t earn it. No, not for alms—
they’re waitin for those who celebrate their promotions. And 
as soon as you promptly get outta there, these doggish mutts 
begin to swallow their frozen turds and show their tongues. 
Their calculations are simple: Probably, lookin at these revoltin 
things, or simply due to the fresh air, you’ll serve them ten-kopeck macaroni à la fleet. And if you get stingy—a more noble 
regular will split his sides. And the droolers will run up and 
snarf everythin. And they get drunk right away, and at once 
engage in marriages-weddins, right in public, and as a result, 
they give birth to such mongrels that better don’t let anybody 
see them. They get born, get stronger, and, like their granddads and moms—along the beaten track, with their famous 
side-amble—march, march to the sickler. Halloo, the chain of 
these generations ain’t breakin here, it rings, clanks, and the 
snack bar, standin in full view, doesn’t disappear from our eyes. 
We’re all mankind’s brood, my dear, and we’re no strangers to 
knockin down a shot. Now consider truthfully my position, 
how can Ilya get his body goin, not to mention the more secret things. My companion escorts me to the bench near the 
gate—and I’m sittin, enfeebled, under the pines, temptin my 
female neybors. Hark! A snowcap fell on my forhead; stop it, 
woodpecker, watch out, hoopoe, you’ll get what you’ve been 
askin for. They pulled, they pulled the wool over Ilya’s eyes, he 
found himself cast aside, and the public makes fun of his Saturdays. Here they are, Discords Beyond the Itil as such, Fomich, 
and we cannot wait to taste the nonexistence. But do me a favor, don’t worry: We’ll get milled over—and back. Everythin 
had already happened on the Itil, all the folks had already been 
there before. Let’s say, somebody appears, and they call him: 
Hey, feller wanderer, will you have some? But the comer cuts 
them short: You took me for someone else, I’m yours, homegrown, you simply forgot about me, so just pour. I also claim—
Dzhinzherela kicked his heels about, settled here and there, 
happened to visit the Wolf River, drank the vino, sharpened the 
unsharpened, caressed lonesome babes, and went, whenever 
he needed, for seasonal work into the wild blue yonder. Hence, 
I am smart like, approximately, Krylobyl. He remarks with insistence: Everythin around is drunkenness, everyone comes 
drunk and leaves drunk, and the river just flows and flows, and 
she don’t give a hoot about nothin. I agree, but lemme be more 
precise: They come drunk and sit, never leavin the crashbaret, 
and she flows, but the shores remain. And on the shores we’re 
nestin—and our life is eternal. But I chatted with You too long, 
I’ve got to hit the sack. If You need anythin, wander in to have 
some tea; don’t be shy—we’ll do some tea-drinkin, tea-sippin. 
At the same time I dare to bother You about the followin: Do 
You have any spare candy wrappers? I’m a fan, I possess a passion for collectin. Bring them as they are, along with the candy. 
And salt, matches, and other necessities are constantly with us. 
And for the bad writin You will, undoubtedly, excuse me, I was 
composin in a considerable haste, and I also took a little bit 
of medicine thanks to my merciful hostess. And the signature, 
if I may. And those who are illiterate—a cross. Listen, where 
in the world did I find such a last name, where did I snag it? 
Maybe I’m a Gypsy baron or maybe the wind simply blew it 
in. Whatever’s the case, somehow I have to set on paper the 
abovementioned. And pour some sand on it. All the most exceptional to You.