---
chapter-number: "15"
title: The Binger's Journal
language: en
---

## Note XXVIII

### Sparrow Night

- Sparrow Night. I will not pound
- Pillows, sheets, and even the cover.
- Take a look, again in my hovel
- Spooky bats are flying around.

- Go away! Enough being mean!
- Why’d you bother the poor hunter now?
- Anyhow, on his sickly pale brow
- The stamp of great torments is seen.

- They flew off. Ah, what great sadness.
- And alarm. And all that you’d wish.

- A washstand. A shovel. A boat.
- A stile. Dandelion. A saddle.
- A curtain. A needle in a haystack.
- And myself, in the eye of my cat.
- White jasmine. A frog and a moth.

- A completely dry paddle.

- The result of events is unknown.
- Will the flashes turn into blunder,
- Or the word of the prophet will thunder,
- Or will it just trickle a bit?

- Ocarina. A cart. And a glass.
- Wooden ducks. Swallowwort. And a roach.
- A seine. A nose-warmer. A jug.
- A tench or a bream for some air
- Will leap up from the mirrorlike stream,
- It will leap and an instant hang there.
- As a mark of a scream
- Or a question?

- A snail and a moth. And a nail.
- And on this nail an old gun.
- And a harrow. And eaves. Scraper brush.
- Empty bottles. A mallet. A bun.
- Jar with grease. Two Ostashkov-made boots.
- And the swifts sitting under
- The eaves.

- A completely different paddle.

- So, who’ll bellow in panic? The cutter
- Who his thimble lost in the clutter?
- Or the king who promised a meager
- Half a kingdom for a decrepit horse?
- Or the jaeger who, being too eager,
- Hit his pate with his saber full force?

- Islands. Or a dragonfly’s shadow.
- River’s bend—like Death’s shiny scythe.
- Freezing twigs on a distant meadow.
- Piece of fatback. And a boar’s hide.

- And a flint stone. And a rusty skate.

- A hair pick. A mortar. A broom.
- And a note: “Went to get ’shrooms”
- From October two years before.

- A discarded horseshoe:
- Like the cast of her lip.
- Or the strummer who strings of steel
- In the garden plucked with great zeal?

- Or a smile of Mama-Maria.

- Repetition: White jasmine. A toad.
- A washstand. And a puddle beneath.
- Psst . . . on that shore, alone like a peg,
- Chuckled the angler with one leg.

- Smell of ozone. Illuminations.

## Note XXIX

### Tales of the Factory Hunter

- *Entre perro y lobo*
- Or between wolf and hound,
- Hung like sticking-out earlobe
- Weightless crescent, skybound.
- At that time nothing mattered,
- But the drink on the ridge,
- And the trains softly muttered
- Somewhere far on the bridge.
- And the forest abutting
- The mill droned with its cogs,
- From the wood it was cutting
- They made boards, beams, and logs.
- And the mug we’ve been sharing
- Smelled of fish just a bit,
- While the river flowed, bearing
- Scents of sawdust and peat.
- And the factory hunter
- Was there telling us that
- He’s a factory hunter,
- He was telling us that.
- This is always the process:
- As the wine disappears,
- Eyes turn watchful and glossy,
- And the bottom appears.
- But an evil smirk throttled
- Smiles on lips, as a clue
- That right now the third bottle
- Came to be empty too.
- Yet a certain green mare,
- Somewhat skinny and bent,
- Not for naught lived out there
- Just beyond river’s bend.
- And this lonesome babe-mare
- For the drinkers who asked
- Always kept as a spare
- A big jug or a flask.
- Like the crescent, my brothers,
- Our boat was air-light.
- So we, teasing each other,
- Splashed with oars in the night.

## Note XXX

### Chasing the Firebird

- By the green saplings of heather, of heather,
- Express is not going, but rapidly pacing
- And inside in tall boots, in tall boots of leather
- A hunter paces, the firebird chasing.
- Strict with passengers is the train’s conductor:
- Foresee no tea! It ran out long ago.
- The barkeep’s strict too: Like a silent actor,
- He ran out somewhere, and as long ago.
- Yeah, thinks the owner of the boots and loosens
- These boots of his, these boots, very tall,
- While he is reading: “You should drink fruit juices!”
- Command from heaven that hangs on the wall.
- Dusk. Here’s the border. Now sleep goes to pieces.
- And through the cars, comparing the rolls
- Of mountain, river, even swamp polices,
- Wander the guards, and check the boots’ soles.
- Your boots! They’re here, but I have a comment:
- The right is too narrow and the left too big.
- You’re under arrest! But no, wait a moment,
- Misunderstanding—it’s not you we seek.
- Station. Some couplers. The air is quite misty.
- A carpenter carries a plank or a tool,
- One greaser jests with another, twisting
- His own large schnozzle and playing the fool.
- From his cigarette case, a train-platform turd,
- With snotty nose and eyes out of kilter,
- Articulating like one speech-impaired,
- Gives an old hag five smokes without filters.
- The train speeds on. And you’re still not sleeping.
- Night shines and smells like the tar’s black stains.
- Anxiously, hotly, like the mentioned bird leaping,
- Alcohol rushes and shoots through your veins.

## Note XXXI

### Epitaphs of the Bydogoshchi Cemetery

- A little church, abandoned,
- Tall weeds grow all around,
- And the cuckoo at sundown
- Flies to the burial ground.
- Is she counting the living?
- Is she cursing the dead?
- Is she mourning and grieving,
- Or just singing like that?
- At this time or another—
- To make the story short—
- Among these hillocks gather
- The wardens for a snort.
- Immediately—two glasses
- And quickly the same blend,
- You wonder how time passes,
- When you’re with them, my friend.
- You never find it boring
- To listen to their lore,
- ’Cause such amazing stories
- You had not heard before.
- And leaning, famished fellow,
- Against the nameless mound,
- Say, Bydogoshchi, hello,
- Thanks for the alms we found.
- Since drinks are so exquisite
- We won’t mind what we’ve lost,
- And each time, when we visit,
- We’ll honor our hosts.
- ✽
- Here’s Pyotr—now worms’ fodder.
- His nickname was Pike Pole.
- All people called him Fyodor,
- He called himself Yegor.
- He was a fine gamekeeper,
- A boor, though, and a thief,
- So on the beam he pilfered,
- He bet he could hang stiff.
- You, who bet him—don’t fear,
- Live and thank God, too:
- Don’t wait when he’ll appear,
- He’ll be waiting for you.
- ✽
- There’s Pavel—ferryman brave.
- His life was in a slump;
- He hoped that his own grave
- Would save him from his hump.
- He drowned and then was gone,
- They looked for him—no use.
- But he’d float up anon,
- Bloated and without shoes.
- The seventeenth of May,
- They buried the poor chump.
- His grave mound, by the way,
- Is not a nicer hump.
- ✽
- Ivan, a glass man seasoned,
- Thought that crystal stank,
- And only for this reason,
- From the bottle drank.
- Shards of glass he’d ever
- Chew as snacks—no pain,
- But choked and he will never
- Be the same again.
- Love is happiness,
- And happiness—glass.
- But glassy happiness
- Breaks with ease, alas.
- ✽
- He lived alone—a reclusive rake,
- But no loose screws or peccadilloes.
- They say that he could perfectly make
- Flutes from twigs of young pussy willows.

- You may blow flutes or blow your nose,
- Bend horseshoes or the truth,
- It’s not important, not even close,
- If company’s right, forsooth.

- The bitter lips of black poplar sway,
- And hum a wind motif each morrow.
- When Gury the hunter drank his gun away
- He went out and died of great sorrow.
- ✽
- One would find no poacher greater:
- Bought fish all day long,
- But he used to sell it later
- For a song.

- Hapless poachers grudged the giver
- His tenches and chubs.
- They met Kolya by the river
- With their clubs.

- Sleep, Nikolka, Volga’s splashing,
- Fires gently gleam.
- Dream about a tench that’s thrashing
- And a bream.

## Note XXXII

### Eclogue

- After lunch that was just a trifle,
- I made sure my duster fit right
- And took down my old faithful rifle
- To inspect its barrel and sight.
- I stepped out. It seemed that a clever
- Dog decided to stick there with me.
- ’Twas considered homeless, however,
- Rather fat it appeared to be.
- But I was not in the least troubled.
- ’Cause what counts? That the dog doesn’t bite.
- While “appeared,” “considered” are babble.
- Yes—stepped out. Ah, what a sight!
- I walked, while the sun’s rays were warming
- The road’s dust, and crickets’ chimes
- Grew louder. The eclogue was forming
- By itself. Mumbling its rhymes,
- I reached Polenov’s house, inviting,
- Followed Savrasov’s winding tracks,
- And soon, like in Turgenev’s writing
- I spooked some of Aksakov’s ducks.
- I raised my gun and shot, atremble,
- But just the echo was my loot.
- And the smoke’s color much resembled
- The fur of leshy in the woods.
- In the meantime, a gold leaf descended
- From a branch of the cherished oak tree.
- Why? I attempted to understand it,
- But in vain. And what did I see?
- In a village, when I was returning,
- I saw happy peasants around,
- In the tree shade dancing and whirling
- To the old bayan’s whizzing sound.
- And the moon seemed to be hanging
- Like a fang of a wolf, bright and young.
- Good to see you, my native hangouts,
- I salute you, my native tongue.

## Note XXXIII

### Return

- The hunter pulled the trigger—but the gun misfired.
- A crow emitted an untimely caw.
- Somewhere, a gramophone screamed, inspired,
- And turnips smelled just like a life ago.

- Why do we rush, waste effort, as deranged,
- And hasten through the plowed field and the glen?
- When we come home—nothing’s really changed,
- And in the mirror—the same good citoyen.

## Note XXXIV

### Sagittarian

- On the eve I was drinking alone in the light of the day,
- And then until dark I was drinking with the fugleman bruiser.
- I cried about something, and braving the thorns on the way,
- I walked to the village, where I was known as a loser.
- I dreamed that I died. And from above, someone filled with great might,
- Whose face, though I was trying, I could not recognize,
- Advised me: Listen, you Binger, get up and do your job right:
- To serve as the Archer high to the heavens you’ll rise.
- In forests of pine, where the razorbacks like to ramble,
- And near the meadows that deer use as their feeding ground,
- At night, as the moon gently shone on gray bushes of bramble,
- The start of the way from here to there I had found.
- ’Twas milky. The green buckhorn did not grow over there,
- In clover could be heard no sweet moderate whine,
- The acorns were not falling from maples as they do everywhere,
- And millers of time at the dikes did not thirst for the wine.
- I was ordered to follow the Scorpio—and soon I encountered
- Winged boys who supplied me with a bow and a quiver;
- They gave me a gold hunting bag and a box of colorful lanterns,
- And a bucket-size jug of deluxe Hunter’s Vodka delivered.
- I’m shooting and drinking. But much more I would relish
- A gulp of the Volga home brew, and a pickle chaser I’d use.
- These are just hunters’ tales that I live, I am happy, and flourish,
- ’Cause drinking and hunting bring joy nowhere else but in Rus.
- So stop being envious, while butting the stars with your eyes,
- Of my way of walking—as soft as the eider duck’s down.
- Here no one can ever outshine lonesome babes from the Valday,
- And no one will give you a sleigh ride the way they had done.
- I’m dead, not alive. And like the Brahmaputra are pure
- My rags and my thoughts—now they rarely make me upset.
- But tell me, is it true that, as earlier, in the morning azure
- On pumpkins, like on the beaters’ foreheads, gleams sweat?

## Note XXXV

### Spackle

- Make a cork to plug the drink
- From the local paper,
- Look out at Valday and think:
- Where are you, my helper?
- Apple. But in essence—crab.
- Crab. But look closer—apple.
- The slope it’s trying to grab,
- Lethargic and slow, but supple.
- Push your cap on brow, and free,
- Feeling hunky-dory,
- Make up, walking to the tree,
- Stuff ’bout Wolf. A story?
- Crabapple. And still—apple.
- Apple. But really—crabapple.
- Obsessed by its inner glow
- And in its movements slow.
- Wolf lived on one Volga shore,
- Hound—the other roamed.
- Couldn’t reach it as before
- So he drank and groaned.
- Crab. But in general—apple.
- Apple. And slow, but supple.
- In autumn its leaves are aflame
- As brass and copper the same.
- Daily, he drank a whole shtof,
- Drank rotgut and groaned,
- That one day he went off
- And upset the Hound.
- Crabapple. Look closer—apple.
- Apple. Look again—crab.
- Is it you or that chap,
- The trash nicknamed Spackle?
- Sharply pricks the naked foot
- Stubble of mown grain,
- Sit beneath crabapple, dude,
- You will feel less pain.
- Crabapple. Nickname—apple.
- Apple. Occupation—crabapple.
- Inebriated pretty well,
- By the way, all go to hell.
- With your teeth pull out the cork,
- Made of paper crumpled.
- What kind of a crazy dork
- Scribbles all these pamphlets?
- Crab. You got smashed—apple.
- Apple. You’ll sober up—crab.
- By the dusk blinded and grappled,
- And by the wood louse enwrapped.

## Note XXXVI

### Supplemental

- Settling down in a land far away
- With a lonesome babe, fairly nifty,
- I composed the Notes that today
- To you in this bottle came drifting.
- I did compose them on the go
- Avoiding stress and strain—
- In gardens, when the leaves were gone,
- On boats or on the plain.
- Or on the rafts, when it was light
- ’Til midnight dimmed the skies,
- Or in a sleigh, when snow gusts tried
- To blind my wolfish eyes.
- Composed them, and on hunting binged,
- Drank with the wardens rotgut,
- Or binge drank, ’til I got unhinged,
- With fishermen their vodka.
- When you have finished reading this,
- To the post office make a dash,
- And, gulping air like a beached fish,
- Send these Notes out. But rush
- The sending; folks can wait no more.
- That’s how, for the best hoping,
- In times of troubles, my pals wait for
- Free bars to open.
