---
chapter-number: "16"
title: The Trapper's Tale
language: en
---

That is how, trying to collect his thoughts, the hunting 
guard Yakov Ilyich Palamakhterov, a man of middling height, ordinary age, and easily forgettable face, 
philosophized. Yakov Ilyich lived beyond the Volga, in a small 
but uncomfortable ranger’s cabin at the edge of the forest, on 
the muddy shore, keeping the old warden Krylobylov company. Palamakhterov lived, sewed slippers and hi-tops, looked 
at the water, drank, went hunting, snacked on potatoes in skins, 
and, wishing to reflect on who he was, tried to gather his 
thoughts. On the kitchen table, among the objects of trapping 
and household equipment, he frequently noticed a kerosene 
lamp. Now and then, the fuel in the container would end and 
the wick would mercilessly smoke. At the same time it would 
become clear that in the copper teakettle, patched once by a 
certain grinder that became a total drunk and ended badly, in 
the teakettle with a handmade wire handle, now used to store 
kerosene, not even a few drops of the latter could be found. I 
had a teakettle with me—Palamakhterov mumbled, looking at 
sparks detaching from the smoldering wick and flying up the 
transparent contraption—a teakettle, my only joy during my 
travels in the Caucasus. Thinking occasionally about this 
mountainous region, Yakov Ilyich smiled, recalling that as a 
boy, having read a lot of nonsense, he passionately dreamed 
about it; later the Caucasus, like all the other places he never 
had a chance to visit, became completely indifferent to him. 
Whenever he realized that he is thinking aloud, Palamakhterov 
would get surprised. And he would speak, apparently addressing only himself, because, as a rule, he was at home alone: Krylobyl almost never dropped in here. After spending a while 
beyond the river, Yakov would come back to the guard post 
without yeast and before leaving again to get it, he would passionately bang for hours on the iron plate that hung on the 
birch tree behind the kennel; at that point, its dwellers would 
get extremely excited. And the gloomy and spiteful beggar 
woman, whom Yakov Ilyich and Fedot Fyodorovich used to 
pick up in the spring at the fish market and adapt to their bachelor needs—she, having left in the morning to pick mushrooms, not infrequently would be slow coming back, and before the first frosts she would disappear for good. And 
Palamakhterov would reassure himself: One should not think 
this way but the other. At the same time, he even tried to gesticulate, but the result was unnatural and silly, like in theater, 
and afterward he would admonish himself, standing motionlessly and having dropped his hands, listless from confusion. 
One needs to think with more energy, he would emphasize, 
one has to inculcate some kind of certainty in the mind, one 
has to constantly—here he would decide to stop, planning to 
find for sure a replacement for the awkward word that was getting ready to finish his phrase, but he would not stop soon 
enough and the word would break loose, jump out—every 
day, Yakov Ilyich would say, keep inculcating. Strange, smacking of ventriloquism, the word would hang in the semidarkness as a row of letters of different size, sickly shining with a 
hazy photogen radiation and, after being written, would turn 
out even less welcome than the uttered one. Agitated, Yakov 
Ilyich would look at it and completely unexpectedly—after all, 
it had not snowed yet—would find himself lying in a wide 
sleigh with his legs in front and with his head hanging or even 
dragging behind, and every time, when the sleigh passed a 
bump or a snow-covered stump, letting it pass between the runners, his head—regardless of how much Yakov tried to raise it 
up soon enough to prevent the blow—would knock on the fly 
with its occiput against the obstruction and bounce with some 
kind of a nutlike crack or crunch, and right away, having rattled 
with its teeth as if it were dead, would fall back again. The situation was even more serious because there was no hat; the latter, 
as Palamakhterov was compelled to conclude, most likely fell 
off; otherwise, feeling pity for himself—feeling pity, although, 
as a result of everything befalling him, he experienced neither 
pain, nor the obvious inconvenience, nor humiliation, as if everything were happening not to him, as if he were looking at it 
from the side—otherwise, the whipper-in considered, otherwise the blows wouldn’t have been so severe. However, having 
fallen off, the hat—as he would notice later—was not getting 
lost but, tied by the strap to the hanger of his sheepskin jacket, 
was dragging behind the sleigh, like the head, even though the 
latter bounced more than dragged. On flat spots, when it was 
not shaking, his consciousness would come to life. Smiling at 
the small multicolored balls recklessly scurrying in the heights 
over the felts of otherworldly billiards—it is the freeze, that is 
the reason it is like that—he would think about the head: It 
stiffened in the cold, and now it is hard, and now it bounces 
and cracks. And even if he suspected in the given explanation a 
certain falsehood and cunning, especially because he could 
not detect a particularly strong freeze, it satisfied him completely and he did not require any other. They are moving at a 
brisk pace. But the kneeling coachman who installed himself at 
the very front of the sleigh keeps urging on, flinging into the 
darkness of the thicket the squawks and whizzes of the prodding. Worried about his hat with earflaps, Yakov Ilyich keeps 
looking back—inasmuch as he is able to look back at all—to 
make sure it did not get lost. But no, as before, it bounces and 
drags, keeping up with those riding in the mobile wagon train, 
and Yakov Ilyich, with an intention to thank for the performed 
service, for the fact that someone with a foresight took care of 
his headgear—tied it like that—but not knowing whom to 
thank, addresses the coachman, in an inscrutable way having 
guessed that precisely he, the coachman, had tied it, and that 
now his, Palamakhterov’s, fate depends on him, and it is advisable to flatter the fellow traveler, tell him something nice, 
somehow win his favor; and so, Yakov Ilyich addresses the 
stranger, speaking for some reason in a completely uncharacteristic-for-him voice of somebody unknown: Thank You, I’m 
so grateful, You’ve secured my hat, else I am ridin and simply 
have no clue, where my hat can be, and it is, as it turns out, right 
here, attached to the hanger; much obliged, I wish You great 
health, and don’t be angry that Krylobylchik and I treated the 
sharpener like that—anythin can happen in the daily grind. 
What’s done is done, we’ve lost our temper, made mischief, it 
happens to everyone, but, after all, as far as he’s concerned, he’s 
no saint either; we have forgiven him the stolen storm lamp as 
a deductible loss, and yet, who has ever heard of exterminatin 
the hounds. Does he think that ’cuz he is an invalidual, everythin is permitted? No, we have certain limits set for the disabled 
too, even if they’re wider, but in addition he, the petty slanderer, 
started scribblin them denunciations that, supposedly, we pilfered his crutches, as if there were no other wardens. The voice, 
the words, and the manner—everything in his speech smacks 
of artificiality and affectation, everything in his monologue 
seems strange to him. However, aware of this, he does not feel 
any awkwardness; on the contrary, he derives pleasure from ingratiating himself with the coachman, and he would like the 
trip to last and last, and he, Yakov Ilyich, a pitiful, hapless, and 
grateful person, with this head of his, would like to be carried 
and carried somewhere, and keep saying quietly and deferentially: Thanks for my hattie, with earflappies, tied to the 
hangerkin—and would sweetly pity himself, and perhaps, if he 
were able to cry, he would shed a few tears. Because, he tries to 
philosophize, what is suffering, what is it as such, indeed, in its 
essence, if it is analyzed thoroughly? How can it be labeled, defined, at long last? But not being able to elucidate the essence 
of suffering and analyze it thoroughly, as well as define and label it, the hunter makes peace with the circumstances and no 
longer wants to worry about anything at all, but wishes that 
everything would end, be finished, pass, and never repeat itself 
again. To cross over, cross over, he fantasizes, to turn into a 
chilling rain of Brumaire and to hover above the bazaar junk of 
the suburbs, above some utterly remote *versta*, why not the 
thirty-fourth, counting from the point where it is convenient 
or desirable; but not counting, because it is not convenient and 
not desirable. Counting nothing, to linger incessantly above 
the muck of gutters and retention ponds, above the loam of 
gardens and wiesenboden of meadows, above the bunch of 
plywood barracks, warehouses, and shacks; to hang for a long 
time, disgracing the winged ones—black and large, and despising their migrations, and chasing the sentries and neighborhood dogs under the awnings and into their booths; to 
remain, piercing from side to side the eruptions of the factory 
pipes, made of sheet metal or brick, and forcing the smokes of 
the fire-breathing switchers to spread over their paths; and to 
walk across the roofs of depots, imitating the railroad roofer of 
the corresponding section of the track, mumbling and monotonously babbling the same thing, and like a drunken glass installer from the same section, carrying on nonsense and a basket of shards to glaze the yawning gaps of vistas; and to last, 
increasing the bedlam of crossroads and telegraph wires, and 
messing up the look of the old-fashioned—once ballroom, but 
now workday—tailcoats and top hats of garden hay-men, 
scarecrows, and all the other characters.