---
chapter-number: "17"
title: The Last Remarks
language: en
---

Citizen Pozhilykh. After the end of days, at azure hour, 
we’re relaxin with some folks on the pant-washin 
deck; we’re dusk-baskin. And, as usual, thru the fogs, 
from the other side of the river, emerge the notorious never- 
to-be-forgotten. Either Aladdin Rakhmatullin accidently 
flashes his teeth, or Kolya Helperov winks softly-softly, or that 
tall one, with a stolen baluster of the same length, appears—
leads the weepin old woman with a creel: Permit me to introduce my widow; for almost a century she’s been roamin without a fella, thank you—she finally met the Wintry Man. And 
Krylobyl surfaces from beyond the river, walkin like on dry 
land: Why are you sittin here? Well, just so. We’re waitin for 
the Heavenly Kingdom—and what the heck brings you here? 
Courage, I am in possession of good news. Well, out with it, 
if you ain’t lazy! He begins: Do you remember how we were 
buryin Gury? Who knows whether Gury or not Gury, I says, 
’cuz personally I did not happen to grace this empty burial 
with my presence, considerin it incorrect, but accordin to the 
grievin bereavers, the empty package was buried with honors. Precisely, says the ranger, and just before we carried him 
out, for the sake of greater respectability we agreed to stick 
inside somethin similar, thinkin that if he appears in person, 
we’ll make the exchange. Unfortunately, nothin either similar or dissimilar was found and nobody had nothin—all of 
them, devils, wagered and lost everythin, brother to brother, 
all of them made each other poor as church mice. But on the 
cot in the dayroom there happened to recline a certain unassumin guest from among the drifters who, as a result of havin 
too many, kept slurrin his words and feelin shabby and faint. 
In order for his face not to disturb anyone, they turned him 
toward the wall, to the east, covered him with a mat, and to 
answer who he is would be difficult from the side; and nobody 
particularly tried; after all, here everythin is simple: You got 
smashed, you’re snorin thru both holes—so you’re welcome 
to rest, whoever you are, only don’t make a ruckus. And the inventory—whether his or not his, who can tell?—was blatantly 
standin in the icon corner under Our Lady of Sorrows. So we 
put these sticks in and carried them out—both for edification 
and for the sake of their not too great, but still, durin a fishin 
lull, resemblance. And now, in my involuntary repasts, I am 
rackin my brains: Wasn’t it ’cuz of these supports that the wardens bumped Ilya off, and he the hounds, and wasn’t it he who, 
accordingly, was restin at that moment on the stove bench? I’m 
rackin my brains back and forth and everythin seems to fit: 
Nothin else, but the grinder’s sticks were buried then; I should 
probably go and tell. Well, everythin is turnin out perfect, I 
says to Krylobyl, and so we need to dig them up tomorrow. 
And so tomorrow we’ll dig them up. Only how did I manage to 
get without them after the wake to Gorodnishche, with what, 
I’d like to ask, did I overcome the wolf and ascended to my 
own haunts? It’s your concern, Petrikeich, don’t drag us into 
your seductive scandals. And he fades in the smoke, gets lost in 
the haze, but the next day disturbs again. Hail to you, my kind 
soul, Fedot Fyodorov, may your good deed be recorded where 
it should, and may all your trespasses be forgotten, especially 
my drownin. Courage, sayeth he, I’m in possession of good 
news. Right, old man, we’ll set out at dawn, though we should 
sharpen our spades first; with unsharpened ones we’ll be pokin 
until the Last Judgment: It’s covered with sod, I reckon. These 
are our latest, Fomich. Excuse me, it turns out, for unfounded 
worries, so long, be who You are, and have Yourself a happy 
resurrection, so to speak. And the last remarks. What they are 
babblin about Ilya—don’t believe it, rein in the evil tongues. 
Just look at them—they got too eager, wanna pin all the dogs 
on me, while I only had enough time to gun down in revenge a 
couple of Vizsla bitches, and even those worth nothin. One, I 
heard, always pretended to be deaf, the other mute, intentionally did not bay at all durin the hunt. Well, miserable pooch, 
come here, lick my scabs without holdin the grudge, gimme 
some healin, whenever you want. And how come your rump 
got so thin? When you were alive you weren’t such a skin and 
bones. Say—I believe, say—at dawn, and we’ll set out, we’ll 
rescue our accessories. Well, let’s shoot the breeze for a while, 
no need to keep the mouth shut and pout without reason. Or 
maybe mysterious for you are these words of mine?
