---
chapter-number: "18"
title: The Note, Sent in a Separate Bottle
language: en
---

## Note XXXVII

### Post Scriptum

- Woe is us; this clime’s bad for health and the mood,
- Every day chains of clouds just get denser,
- The one who later will find these Notes should
- Burn and scatter on the Wind Rose my verses.
- Like the Mongol Horde’s treasure, its crown in old tales,
- Amztarakhan once vanished, passed on,
- And like roaches that fed in the Khan’s ponytails
- With time passing, would also be gone;
- Like during the thaw, tracks of sleighs and of elks
- Melt and leave no marks to observe;
- Like—without a trace also—did vanish the works
- Of nations and the nations themselves;
- Like after a bottle, despair may be banished
- Though at first our souls wrings and smotes,
- The same way—seeking no glory—may vanish,
- Together with the bottle, these Notes.
- But who needs this stuff? Therein lies the rub.
- Why did I, the hunter-ragpicker,
- On the face of existence a blemish, a scab,
- A lecher, and a pimp who loves liquor,
- Compose all these Notes at this river’s spring
- And floated them down in a hurry?
- Such a meaningless loss of candles and ink
- And a waste of the force of the current.
- How annoying: All these years irretrievably lost,
- Playing, singing, and having much fun;
- You gaze in the tumbler—and you’re just a ghost.
- Alas, things look bad, you are done.
- Now I darn my old sack during pre-winter’s spell,
- Fix the fishnets, and sharpen tools’ tines,
- But I know—pushy buds will stealthily swell
- And burst out from their narrow confines.

- So I dare you to burn, you dumb-as-a-bell,
- My amazing, ingenious lines!
